around the year
1333 the North African writer and
traveler iban bat UT went on a journey
around all of Asia that would take him
to India and over the sea to Sri Lanka
Bangladesh Malaysia and eventually on to
his final destination of
China but the first leg of this journey
took him along the winding roads over
land from
Constantinople he traveled past the
shores of the black and Caspian Seas
over vast grasslands and on South Wards
through the deserts of Central Asia in
what is now Kazakhstan Turkmenistan and
usbekistan
iban batuta had heard marvelous stories
about the opulent cities that lay along
the vast trade route known as the Silk
Road which laced across the continent of
Asia these were the cities of BU bukar
and
samand first he visited the city of
bukara once the jewel of Islamic
learning a city of enormous libraries
and
colleges but to his disappointment when
he arrived he found the city a much
reduced place as he wrote in his
journal we traveled for a whole day
through contiguous Orchards with streams
trees and habitations and arrived at the
city of
bukara this city was formerly the
capital of the Lands Beyond the river
J but was laid in Ruins so at the
present time its mosques colleages and
bazaars are in Ruins all but a few and
its inhabitants are looked down
upon there is not one person in it today
who possesses any religious learning or
who shows any concern for acquiring it
surprised at the sorry sight of the once
great city of bukara iban batuta
continued on to the opulent Metropolis
of
samand I journeyed to the city of samand
once one of the greatest and finest of
cities and most perfect of them in
Beauty it is built on the bank of of the
river called the wadil werin along which
there are water wheels to supply water
to the
Orchards 1 but when he arrived at the
Oasis of sarand he found it too was in a
much diminished
state the city was sparsely inhabited
its legendary walls torn down long ago
and its Grand buildings standing in
Ruins
there were formerly great palaces on the
river bank and constructions which bear
witness to the lofty aspirations of the
town's folk but most of this is
obliterated and most of the city itself
has also fallen into ruin it has no City
wall and no Gates and there is
vegetation growing inside
it Ian batuta soon left that Melancholy
place and continued on his
journey finally he passed through the
city of balk now in Northern
Afghanistan this had once been another
wealthy trade Hub and a center for the
zoroastrian
religion from a distance he could see
its tall buildings rising out of the
river Plains but as he got closer he saw
no smoke of cooking fires no animals in
the fields
no traffic of people in its
streets an eerie feeling must have crept
up on
him next we crossed the river Jen into
the land of corasan and marched for a
day and a half crossing the river
through uninhabited desert and Sands to
the city of
balk it is completely dilapidated ated
and uninhabited but anyone seeing it
would think it to still be inhabited
because of the solidity of its
construction for it was a vast and
important
city its mosques and colleges preserve
their outward appearance even now with
the inscriptions on their buildings in
sized with lapis blue
paints as he passed through this
devastated region he heard stories about
other ruined cities lying out in the
desert now so empty of life that they
could offer no shelter to
Travelers the great cities of K are four
two of them are inhabited namely harat
and nishapur and two are in Ruins namely
balk
had he journeyed out to the city of MV
he would have found an even more
devastated ruin just a series of jagged
earn remains rising out of the cracked
Salt Flats of the desert home only to
owls and wild dogs where once a city of
half a million people had
stood everywhere across this region the
cities bore the scars of one of the
Middle Ages most momentous and World
Chang ing
events this was the uniting of a nomadic
people who called themselves the
Mongols from their Homeland far away in
the step grasslands of East Asia the
Mongols had fused their anarchic
pastoral culture into a war machine that
has had few equals in history and forged
an Empire that would stretch across much
of the land mass of Asia the largest
continuous land EMP Empire in
history in almost every land they
touched they would bring destruction and
death fear and anguish but in places
they also laid the foundation for our
modern
world as iban batuta stood in the
abandoned streets of Bal samak and
bukara he must have wondered at the
unlikely story of these strange nomadic
conquerors he must have wondered those r
ruined palaces and crumbled places of
worship those empty markets and
dilapidated houses and asked himself
where had these mysterious conquerors
come from what did they want and why had
no one been able to stop them
[Music]
my name's Paul Cooper and you're
listening to the fall of civilizations
podcast each episode I look at a
civilization of the past that Rose to
glory and then collapsed into the ashes
of History I want to ask what did they
have in common what led to their fall
and what did it feel like to be a person
alive at the time who witnessed the end
of their world in this episode I want to
tell one of the most remarkable and
unlikely stories from medieval history
the story of the Mongol
Empire I want to show how this group of
nomadic horse riders United the peoples
of the Mongolian step and forged them
into a truly unique kind of state I want
to describe how they conquered much of
the lands of Eurasia and brought the
distant cultures of China Persia the
Middle East and Europe into contact and
I want to tell the story of how the
world's largest land Empire finally came
apart and left the World As We Know It
in its
[Music]
wake the Eurasian step is the largest
grassland on
Earth it's a vast Corridor of seasonal
savanas that run virtually the entire
length of Asia and covers around 7% of
the planet's land surface it stretches
from Hungary and Poland in Eastern
Europe more than 8,000 kilm passing over
mountain ranges and Rolling Hills past
salty Inland seas and Sandy deserts and
over countless Rivers until it reaches
northern China and the forests of manua
on the Pacific
coast the word step entered English from
the Russian language with its origin
possibly rooted in the old Slavic word
supi which means a place that is flat
and bare the Russian author Anton COV
describes the landscape of the
step a plane broad boundless girdled by
a chain of Hills lies stretched before
the Traveler's eyes
the hills merge into Rising ground
extending to the very Horizon and
disappearing into the Lilac hued far
distance on and on you travel but where
it all begins and where it ends you just
cannot make
out course steep grass milkwood wild
hemp all are drenched in duw and
caressed by the
Sun the green forested lands of China
and Europe receive moisture from the
winds blowing in from the Pacific and
Atlantic Oceans meaning that they can
support large trees forests and all
manner of crops but the lands of the
step receive most of their air flow from
the north from the Frozen polar ocean of
the Arctic
cold air cannot hold much moisture and
what little it contains Falls as rain in
the northern mountains where the great
Frozen Pine forests of Siberia
stretch the low rainfall on the step
means that trees cannot survive and even
species of long grasses find it
difficult to take root as a result All
That Remains here are the hardiest
species of short grasses for this reason
the step has always supported massive
herds of grazing
animals the first humans to set foot on
the step arrived about 40,000 years ago
they were hunter gatherers who lived off
what the land
provided in its rolling grassland they
hunted mammoths then once those had died
out boar Antelope goats and Oro and one
animal that lived in the step in
abundance the wild
horse horses evolved in North America
around 4 million years ago but had
crossed over to Asia during one of the
last ice ages when a land bridge existed
between Alaska and Eastern
Russia humans and horses would one day
form one of the most successful
Partnerships in in history but our
fascination with them goes back even
further horses are the animal most
frequently depicted in the oldest
prehistoric cave paintings even in those
of chave cave in France which are more
than 30,000 years old and predate the
domestication of the Horse by 25
Millennia for all these thousands of
years humankind had looked on the horse
as a symbol of power Grace
and perhaps also
Freedom when people arrived on the
Eurasian step they initially hunted
horses for food like any other animal
with horse bones showing up in Slaughter
sites from at least 10,000 years ago but
sometime around 6,000 years ago they
began to be kept as
livestock humans first used horses for
milk and meat alongside their cattle
sheep and goats but over the following
thousand years or so humans learned that
if a horse was sufficiently tamed it
would allow a human to ride on its
back we will never know which daring
young man or woman first leapt up onto
the back of a horse and braved the
inevitable bucking and kicking that
every horse breaker must learn to endure
but when they did they changed the
course of human
history around 5,000 years ago we begin
to see evidence of horse riding on the
Eurasian step one burial site in Bai in
Northern Kazakhstan contains the bones
of horses with the earliest signs of
wear on the teeth and jawbones that
suggest they had worn a metal bit in
their mouths for much of their life
which could be attached to rains for a
rider
this development occurred at a momentous
time in human
history around the world the earliest
cities were just then coalescing in
Egypt Mesopotamia China and elsewhere
and a new way of human life was taking
shape this new lifestyle was based on
the planting of grain the making of
pottery and the building of fixed
dwellings soon came hierarchies and
religious
priests and Kings armies and City
walls from this settled way of life the
first written words would be set down
cut into clay tablets in the Sumerian
cities of UR and Uruk carved into the
stone temples of Egypt and into shoulder
bones and tortoise shells in
China but it's clear that in the vast
expanse of the Eurasian step an equally
dramatic Revolution ution was taking
place it's around this time that the
first mention of horses begins to appear
in the written texts of the Sumerians
they would call them by the name an Kura
meaning Donkey of the mountains since
they first arrived from the mountainous
North one Sumerian text written more
than 4,000 years ago is one of the first
to mention this new animal describing
the hero God lul Banda as being as Swift
as a mountain
horse holy Lugal Banda came out from the
mountain cave and from that spot he sped
away like a horse of the mountains like
a lone wild ass he darted over the
mountains like a large powerful donkey
he raced a slim donkey eager to run he
bounded along
human life had just sped up considerably
and the domestication of the horse would
change life on the step
forever a herder traveling by foot can
cover a maximum of only about 30 km a
day which limits how large his flock can
be and how far he could range in search
of new grazing lands but riding on the
back of a horse meant you could cover
more than 100 km at a push and you could
travel at five times the speed over a
short
distance with greater ability to cover
large areas you could also effectively
manage much larger herds and with more
food available you could establish ever
bigger families and social
groups while all around the world other
peoples were settling down into ever
larger cities built of mud brick and
stone the people of the step were
developing a parallel way of life a life
constantly on the
[Music]
move after the horse people in the
western step also likely invented the
wheel allowing them to transport bigger
loads as well as their family
the elderly and children too young to
ride whole communities could now become
completely mobile living their lives
from birth to death without ever
settling in one
place this alternative way of life would
meet with remarkable
success one Legacy of that success is
the language that many of us speak today
beginning perhaps around 4,000 BC an
enigmatic population known only as the
Proto Indo Europeans rode out of the
western portion of the step in all
directions they brought their horses
their wagons and chariots with
them wherever they went from India to
Persia Greece and Northern Europe they
conquered or settled
and left their language
behind their lost dialect is the
ancestor of
445 languages that survived to this day
from Hindi singhala Punjabi and fasi to
Russian Spanish French German and
English and in all of these languages
they left traces of their way of
life many languages in the Indo European
family use similar words derived from
Proto indoeuropean for objects like
wheel axel wagon Chariot and of course
horse it's believed the Proto Indo
Europeans had two words for horses which
have been reconstructed to something
like EOS and Marcos possibly to
differentiate between a wild horse and a
tamed horse
EOS entered Latin as eus from which we
get equestrian and it entered ancient
Greek as hippos from which we get
Hippodrome and
hippopotamus and the word Marcos has
survived in English as the word for a
female horse a
mare this English word can be found
echoing on the other side of the world
in Mongolia where a single horse is
called Mo and even in the
non-indo-european language of Mandarin
Chinese where a horse is called
M today these words connect people on
every side of the globe and nearly half
of the world's population speaks a
language descended from the
Indo-European
family the Proto Indo Europeans were the
first known Nomads to ride out of the
step and leave their mark on history but
they were far from the
last still there were drawbacks to the
nomadic
lifestyle while the settled peoples of
the world developed alphabets and
writing systems that allowed them to
keep records and recount their histories
the peoples of the step did not develop
their own system of
writing for this reason for much of
their history we can only detect their
presence
through the writings of others who often
feared and hated
them in the 5th Century BC the Greek
historian Herodotus would write one
account of the horse riding Nomads who
lived in the step around the Black Sea
and increasingly made armed raids into
Central Europe a people the Greeks
called the cians
rather than build cities or walls they
all carry their homes around with them
on wagons practice their archery from
horseback and depend for their living on
cattle rather than the fruits of the
plow how then could they fail to defy
every effort made to conquer them or to
pin them
down already the settled peoples of the
world were encountering a paradox that
despite all the technological advance
vement that Agricultural Society had
brought these step peoples were still
exceptionally difficult to
fight more than 800 years later the
struggling Roman Empire was limping
through the remains of the 4th Century
rocked by crisis and Civil War it was at
this point that they were menaced by a
new threat uh no adic people who rode
out of the step and sent waves of
refugees fleeing in their wake they
would be known as the
Huns the Roman writer amanus marinus
wrote with distaste about these
frighteningly ruthless
Nomads the hanss are a race Savage
beyond all parallel they grow up without
beards with closely knit and Strong
Limbs
they are all without fixed Abode or
settled mode of life none of their
offspring when asked can tell you where
he comes from since he was conceived in
one place born far from there and
brought up still farther
away the arrival of the hanss was a
major factor that contributed to the
collapse of the Western Roman
Empire in the decades that followed
under the rule of their leader Atilla
the Huns would remake the balance of
power in Europe they fleetingly captured
large areas up to the banks of the Rind
and left fire and destruction in their
wake part of the reason for the Hun's
success was their Innovative use of the
technological development of the
composite bow bows made of a single
piece of wood had a natural limit to
their power but on the step a good bow
could mean the difference between life
and death and so people had poured
immense energy into developing them by
the time of the Huns these were already
intricate constructions combining
multiple materials a core of Maplewood
bone and Antelope horn knotted with
sinue deer gut and leather all held
together with a fish based glue the
combination of these materials created a
bow with immense
elasticity capable of hurtling an arrow
at tremendous speeds and over great
distances reportedly as far as 300 met
if these accounts are accurate then
these bows could shoot further than an
English Longbow which stood taller than
a man but crucially was compact enough
to be drawn from horseback
the combination of horse and composite
bow would make the step horse Archer the
deadliest single entity on the planet
and in Europe these weapons would come
to be known with fear and reverence as H
[Music]
Bose the people of China struggled no
less with their nomadic
neighbors During the period period of
the Han Dynasty a people they knew as
the Shong no constantly menaced their
borders for much of the first Millennium
and may even have been the same people
as the European
hanss one Han period Chinese writer
sumar Chen describes their way of
life the Shong no are mountain
barbarians they move in search of water
and pasture and have no walled cities or
fixed dwellings nor do they engage in
any kind of Agriculture they wear
clothes of hide or wraps made of fur or
felt they have no writing and even their
promises and Agreements are only verbal
the little boys start out by learning to
ride sheep and shoot birds and rats with
a bow thus all the young men are able to
act as armed Cavalry in time of
[Music]
War around the 4th Century these peoples
also introduced the sterup straps for
the rider's feet that help them stay in
the saddle and allow them even greater
control of their
horses one medieval Chinese writer
describes the sight of a step horse
warrier in
action when they ride at a Gallop they
always stand in the stups rather than
sit in the saddle they are Swift as the
onrush of a gale and strong as the
weight of a mountain Wheeling left and
cutting right like wings in flight they
shoot with power enough to pierce
armor for the civilizations that lived
on the borders of the step in China
India Persia the Middle East and Eastern
Europe these nomadic peoples could be
alien frightening and
primitive while they were divided they
could be contained controlled and
violently put down but every few hundred
years they would unite into a force
large enough to flood out of the
step they would come to conquer and
settle to wreak havoc and so destruction
but every time to change the course of
history
the most dramatic of these stories would
take place as the 12th century came to a
close and the memory of atilla's hanss
had faded to just another ghost story
from classical history it would come in
the form of a people who were perhaps
the most unlikely of
conquerors when our story starts they
had many names but soon they would
become known as the Mongol
go to find the location of the beginning
of this story we must travel to the east
along the wide expanse of the Eurasian
step for thousands of kilometers we
would see only grassland and seasonal
deserts then we pass over the alai
mountains home to wolves curly horned
ibeck and
Eagles finally we would reach the Far
Eastern step on a high plateau of what
is today
Mongolia at the end of the 12th century
the Mongols were just one of countless
groups that existed in this land
speaking turkic languages like weer and
dialects of Mongolian and worshiping any
number of gods but despite this
variation many of them followed a
similar way of
life life on the step meant following
the natural cycles of the
world in the warm summers The Rains come
and the grassland flushes green during
these months the nomad's herds of cattle
goats sheep camels and horses have
plenty to eat and they graze in their
summer pastures on the open
grassland but as the cold dry Winters
descend herders would move to their
winter pastures in the north where the
green valleys at the foot of the
mountains remain shaded and there are
still grasses
growing this natural cycle dictated
every aspect of Step life as one
medieval Chinese writer jao gong
describes in their custom each time the
GR grass grows green is one year so if
someone asks one of them his age he says
how many times the grass is greened also
once when I asked one of them what month
and day he was born he laughed and
replied I can't remember nor did I ever
know it in the first
place winter on the step is
Harsh during these months the wind blows
straight from Siberia and a layer of ice
can often cover the grasslands
completely when the grass is frozen step
peoples would allow their horses to
graze ahead of the other animals they
would use their Hooves to crack the ice
and then other livestock like sheep
could follow
in the flat featureless landscape people
navigated primarily using Rivers which
interlace the step in countless
waterways among them the oron the
selener and the
onon by riding up and down these Rivers
the step peoples could find their way
and would never be far from water for
their
horses the knowledge of these River
paths were passed on from person to
person by Word of Mouth through poems
and
[Music]
songs the primary mode of shelter in the
step was the
tent one Chinese writer of the time
named Lee sinan describes these
habitations they have neither walls nor
moats nor houses nor Mansions but
instead make felt tents for which they
Cho Dwelling Places that have the most
beneficial water and
grass in English these tents are often
called yurs derived from a turkic word
but in Mongolian they are known as gear
their structures are made of lattice of
light but strong Willow wands and their
walls are made of felt a material
created by pressing together layer upon
layer of sheep's wool these tents are
warm during winter and cool during
summer and they are also fully mobile
designed to be dismantled and rebuilt
every day if necessary and carried from
place to place on the back of
carts the Chinese Observer Pang da wrote
The Following description of seeing step
people moving across the
landscape the yurs that is felt tents in
which they live have neither walls nor
roof beams they move them to follow the
grass and water never staying for long
cattle horses or camels are used to pull
their carts on which it is roomy enough
to sit or
recline these carts are dispatched in
groups of five looking like Columns of
ants as they wind along extending out
for five
miles some of these carts could be huge
designed to carry the tents of of Nobles
on their back one European visitor to
Mongolia in the Middle Ages William of
rhook described seeing carts as large as
10 m wide about the length of a London
bus these dwellings are constructed of
such a size as to be on occasions 30 ft
across I myself once measured a breadth
of 20 ft between the Wheel tracks of a
wagon and when the the dwelling was on
the wagon it protruded beyond the wheels
by at least 5 ft on either side the
wagon's axle was as large as a ship's M
I have counted 22 oxen to one
wagon these carts were insulated from
the changeable weather of the step and
those used to transport valuables were
protected by a special kind of felt that
had been soaked in waxy Tallow to keep
out the
rain when their day's traveling was done
the step peoples would fortify their
Camp by placing their carts in a ring
making a makeshift wall to keep out
Raiders and
thieves their gear tents were always
erected facing south so that the sun
would shine in through the doorway the
heads of the house and people of High
status would always sit on the north
side of the tent facing ing the door
while more junior members of the clan
would sit in the
south in the center of the gear was a
hearth fire made from burning pieces of
dried dung this was a resource in
infinite abundance among herders but
usually goat dung was preferred since it
burned cleanly and gave off a pleasant
smell like burning
leaves Above This Fire there was was a
smoke hole cut in the felt
roof these smoke holes had a practical
purpose as a chimney but they also held
a kind of spiritual
significance the fire and the hole in
the tent were considered to be a means
to communicate with the Clan's ancestors
and was a ceremonial space for
rituals we can imagine a Mongol family
sitting around this fire with the vast
darkness of the Step at night outside
watching the Sparks of their fire drift
out through the hall in the roof as the
howling step wind outside batters the
felt walls of the
[Music]
tent for those Nomads who lived on the
open grasslands of the step life was
good their vast herds turned the
virtually infinite supply of grass into
ample meat and milk from which they
could make a variety of cheese yogurts
and other dairy products and into dung
that could be burned in their fires the
step gave them everything they needed to
survive and for everything else they
could trade with the lands of China to
the South nomadic peoples would buy silk
fine silver items and carve Furniture
along with all the Comforts of
sophisticated society and in return they
would trade Northern Goods like Furs of
which the most valued was the delicate
dark Pelt of the Sable a kind of small
Pine Martin along with leather bone and
antler for carving herd animals like
cattle and sheep and Majestic tame
hunting birds like the golden eagle
taken from the forest as fledglings and
trained to hunt small
game but above all they traded the thing
that settled societies needed most and
Nomads had in enormous Supply
horses as a result these Clans in the
south of the Mongolian step like the
tatas and the kit were richer and lived
more comfortable lives and they defended
their enviable positions with extreme
ferocity in contrast for much of their
history the Mongols were Among The
Losers of the step
World while other Nomads thrived on the
southern grasslands the Mongols
subsisted in the harsh North on the edge
of the mountains and the endless
Siberian forests home to wolves bears
and wild forest peoples like the
merkit here the grasses were meager and
couldn't support large herds as a result
the Mongols supplemented their diets by
hunting deer and small mammals like
maruts Gathering pine nuts in the
forests and fishing in the
rivers the medieval Persian historian
atalik juvani writes about the sorry
state of this
people they had no Chief or
ruler each tribe live separately they
were not United with one another and
there was constant fighting and
hostility between them their clothing
was of the skins of dogs and mice and
their food was the Flesh of those
animals and other dead things their wine
was May's milk and their dessert the
fruit of a tree shaped like a pine the
sign of a great king amongst them was
that his stups were made of iron from
that one can form a picture of their
other
luxuries part of the reason for their
poor situation was that the Mongols were
among the most divided peoples of the
step constantly fighting amongst
themselves other step peoples had long
ago formed large
confederations and adapted to the
cultures of more settled societies
around them even taking on their
religions some like the kitan had
adopted Buddhism While others had
converted to Islam which had arrived in
the southern step some centuries before
usually with traitors passing through
others still like the kerit and the
nimon had even converted to The Cult of
a powerful Shaman from a far away land
who was rumored to have risen from the
dead a man named Jesus Christ
word of his teachings had been brought
to Mongolia by Assyrian nestorian
missionaries around the 11th century and
had appealed to many people there since
the name Jesus reminded them of the word
yesu which in Mongolian means the number
nine a number considered to be sacred
and to bring good luck but the Mongols
on the edge of the Siberian forests had
adopted no such
beliefs they maintained the ancient
beliefs of their ancestors worshiping
the Earth mother goddess and their
ancient god of the Great Blue Sky who
they named
tangri the 11th century Muslim scholar
Mahmud Al kashgari describes the worship
of this
God tangri means god the Infidel Nomads
call heaven tangry and likewise
everything natural that impresses them
for example a high mountain or a large
tree they worship such things and they
call a wise man tangri
KH the God tangri was believed to reside
particularly in the region of a vast
freshwater lake known as Lake Bal and
it's here that the mythology of the
Mongols
begins in the Mongol conception of their
own history their story began when a
Siberian wolf M with a r deer and gave
birth to the first of their Royal
Line This founding myth is recounted in
the enigmatic document known as the
secret history of the
Mongols there was a blue gry wolf born
with a destiny from heaven above his
wife was a beautiful red fellow do they
came Crossing
Thea they made their home in the
headwaters of the Onan
River with a surface area of more than
30,000 square km Lake Bal is slightly
larger than the country of Belgium and
is the large freshwater lake in
Eurasia and sitting as it does on a
tectonic Rift it is also by far the
deepest on the planet plunging to a
depth of more than 1,600
M as a result it is also the world's
largest lake in volume containing more
than all the American Great Lakes
combined in fact this one lake is
estimated to contain somewhere between a
quarter to a fifth of all the surface
fresh water on planet
Earth for most people of the step this
was the largest body of water they would
ever see and on account of this the
Mongols would often simply refer to it
as the
sea when winter comes to the Siberian
wastes Lake byal freezes solid with ice
many meters thick and the Snows blow in
chaotic patterns over its
surface according to the story 11
Generations after this unnatural
coupling of wolf and deer on the shore
of Lake Bal a woman known as Alan Gua or
Alan the beautiful would give birth to
five sons and from these five men were
supposed to have descended the Royal
lineage of the Mongols
one day the legend says Alan the
beautiful found her five Sons arguing
with one another she gathered them
together and taught them a lesson that
has passed into
Legend she gave them each an arrow shaft
and told them to break it each one was
broken and let
fall then she took five arrow shafts
bundled together
gave the shafts to them and told them to
break them all five of them one after
another took the five arrow shafts
joined together but were unable to do as
she said and break it then their mother
Alan the beautiful spoke words of
admonition to her five
Sons you my five Sons were born from a
single womb you are just like the five
arrow shafts if you are alone one by one
you will be easily broken by anyone but
if you were joined in accord as one then
how could you be broken by
anyone this story was told to
generations of Mongol children and it
contained a powerful truth about life on
the
step out there family was the most
powerful connection that anyone had
and without it you were left alone
hungry and
defenseless Mongols thought of their kin
relationships as a kind of branching
tree or
river they traced their ancestry back to
real ancestors a relationship known as
Uruk but the Mongol Elite also held to a
kind of mythical kinship in which every
person was descended from one or other
semi- mythical character who lived in
the vague and distant past often one of
the sons of Alan the
Beautiful In This Way Mongols considered
themselves to belong to a wider Clan
group that often had little to do with
their actual Heritage these they called
their
obok accompanied with these two systems
of relationship was a third one that
people could freely choose to enter into
this was known as Ander a kind of blood
brother in this ritual two close friends
could swear an eternal Allegiance
essentially becoming family and this
relationship was taken just as seriously
as any connection of
kinship one Mongol text of the time
records the depth of this
Bond
for if we listen to the words of the
elders and the
Ancients this is the way in which Ander
love each
other people who are Ander or as if they
have one life without any
separation and are lifelong saviors to
each other
[Music]
to survive in the harsh world of the
step people had to be tough but they
also had to come
together to get a sense of the reality
of this life there is no better example
than the upbringing of one man born here
on the step whose story we know in
unprecedented
detail a man who would rise from the
humblest beginnings imaginable to change
the course of world
history his name was
temoin but that is not the name that
history would know him
[Music]
by it's worth mentioning that all of the
story you about to hear was very nearly
lost to
history but in
1866 a Russian monk working in the AR
archives of China uncovered a remarkable
manuscript it was a Chinese copy of a
copy of a copy of a lost Mongolian
document written by an unknown author
sometime in the 13th
century This Book used Chinese
characters to recreate the phonetic
sounds of the Mongolian language and was
used as a kind of textbook to help
Chinese Scholars who were learning
Mongolian for this reason its characters
appeared to be nonsense in Chinese and
so it was lost among the
archives but once its contents were
deciphered it transformed our
understanding of this
period it was a document written only
for the eyes of the Mongolian royal
family telling in unprecedented detail
the ups and downs of their story and for
this reason it came to be known as the
secret history of the
Mongols it's the first and most
important Source ever written in the
Mongolian language and it Blends
narrative history with flourishes of
vaulting epic
poetry the story of the man named temoin
begins in the second half of the 12th
century with his mother a young woman
named olun
she was from the Eastern Mongolian step
to the southeast of lake byal and was
probably no more than a
teenager she had just married a man
named chilu of the merket
people this young couple was in love and
she was now traveling back to his
homeland with him to live with his
family in their camp but things would
not go according to the young lovers
plan on their fateful journey home they
passed through the lands of a warrior
named yug the leader of a small Mongol
band on the great Onan
River yugay had once been a powerful
leader but had recently fallen on tough
times that day he was out hunting with
his Hawk when he saw the marriage
procession passed by and caught sight of
the beautiful face of oon
yugay already had a wife but upon seeing
olun he became overcome with desire for
her and as a Mongol Warrior he was used
to taking what he
desired he rode back to his camp and
gathered his two brothers and together
they chased after the wedding party with
murder in their
hearts when olun and her husband saw the
warrior Brothers bearing down on them
she begged her husband husband to flee
and save his life as the secret history
recalls his bride Madame olun said to
him you have you understood what those
three men are about their looks say they
want your
life as long as you have your life at
least you will find a woman to Wed save
your life
[Music]
chilu listened to her pleas and fled
across the grasslands leaving o alun to
be
captured the two of them would never see
each other
again the three Riders chased him from
behind over seven ridges until they
drove him off they came back and yasay
took Madame oon by the tether and she
wailed in a great voice she wailed until
the onon river echoed it and the wooded
Valley rang with
it we don't know what happened to O's
husband chilu but it seems he never made
any attempt to recapture her in the
harsh world of the step a man only had
rights to what he could defend and olun
was now no longer considered his
wife as for o alun her heartbreak must
have been overwhelming but she seems to
have accepted her fate and settled into
the new life that yesugay had forced
upon her at the edge of the mountains
and the great Siberian
Forest here she would have to be tough
to
survive yesugay already had a wife and
by then this woman had borne him a son
named bega soon o alun too became
pregnant and gave gave yugay their first
child together this child was a boy and
it said that when he came screaming into
the world he was clutching a tiny but
fearsome Omen in his little
hand when Madame olun was big with child
just then when they were at Del on balak
on the onon river he was born when he
was born he was born clutching a clot of
blood in his right hand the size of a
knuckle
[Music]
bone to the Mongols this was an
unmistakable sign that the boy would
grow up to be a
warrior the year was around
1162 in the Chinese calendar the Year of
the Horse
at the time the Mongols were at war with
another much more powerful step people
the tatars who lived closer to the
border with Northern
China yesugay had recently captured a
Tatar Warrior named tamuin UGA in battle
and in celebration of this feat he
decided to name the new baby boy after
his captured
enemy the name tamuin likely meant black
Smith or iron worker but in time it
would come to gain a different
Association the iron one or the man of
iron this captured man may even have
been executed at the naming ceremony and
his strength ritually given to the new
baby
boy from this bloody beginning temo
Jin's childhood was a tough one but it
forged him into the man he would
become living at yuga's camp on the
banks of the onon river he would have
learned to hunt and fish and of course
how to ride a horse from a young age one
Chinese writer describes the life of a
step
child even three-year-old toddlers are
secured to the saddle with rope and
given something to grasp with their
hands so they can follow along as the
rest Dash about on
Horseback in their fourth and fifth
fifth years they carry under one arm a
small bow and short arrows and when
grown they occupy themselves during all
four seasons with hunting
game hunting on the step was done using
a system known as the nurge or noose and
these Grand hunts would take place every
year and involve large numbers of
different families and kin
groups every Mongol Lear learned from a
young age how to work together with
other Riders across a vast distance
encircling a huge area of land and
driving all the wild animals within it
into the center of their
ring then the Noose
tightened they would drive the animals
closer and closer together until there
was nowhere left to run then they would
begin to fire hundreds of arrows into
the mass of terrified prey
yesugay would have taught his young Sons
this skill from a young
age but Teo Jin's relationship with his
kidnapper of a father may have been a
strained one yesugay already had an
oldest son by another woman the boy
named bega and Bea seems to have enjoyed
reminding temoin of his place when
tushin was 9 years old his father
clearly worried about the division in
his
family he decided to take the young boy
to find a wife of his
own they traveled out together and met
with the ruler of a nearby Clan who was
also something of a
shaman he told yesugay that the boy who
rode beside him was destined for great
things
in this boy of yours is a boy with flame
in his eyes and fire in his face last
night I Dreamed a Dream a white fulcon
flew towards me clutching the Sun and
the Moon and a lighted on my hand this
dream of mine was showing me that you
would come leading this boy of
yours the chief gave the young boy the
hand of one of his daughters a girl
named
borter she was a year older than him and
at the first sight of her temoin fell in
love A Love that would never leave him
on his way home his father yug must have
been
satisfied he had found a good wife for
his young son and could now head home to
a family made at
peace but fate would conspire against
him that night he stopped at a camp
belonging to some tartar
Men by this time the Tartar and the
Mongols were no longer at War but they
were still bitter
Rivals the Customs on the step stated
that whenever someone stopped at your
Camp you were required to set your
differences aside and offer them
Hospitality but these tartars had other
ideas as the secret history recounts
remembering their early Grudge they
plotted murder and mixed in Poison for
him feeling sick on the way he went for
three days and arrived at his gar and
felt
worse y said my insides feel sick I fell
victim to a plot and now I feel sick
inside having spoken he died
next hearing of this treachery from a
rider sent by his dying father temoin
rode hard across the step heading home
to be with his mother and left his
betrothed bter
behind the death of yugay left this
vulnerable family exposed and alone in
the cruel world of Step
politics yuga's Clan had been a mixture
of different peoples including families
of Mongols known as the bourin and taut
and they had little holding them
together other than yuga's
leadership now they split into separate
parts and departed in all directions and
none of them had any room for a widowed
woman and her hungry
children they left olun and her children
behind alone destitute and starving on
the banks of the onon river as the
secret history
records the taute Brethren moved Camp
down along the onon river to leave
behind on the Range Madame olon the
Widow the little ones and boys the
mothers and
children the taut took their livestock
their goats and their sheep and left
left them with only the few horses they
owned this was practically a death
sentence when winter came to the step
this feeble group would no doubt freeze
and run out of
food but remarkably that's not what
happened that's because o alun refused
to let her children
starve madame oon born both womanly and
wise finding food for her small boys
fixing up her flowing skirts flying up
and down the onon river's flood finding
wild fruits crab apples and cherries
filled she the night and day their
famished
throats they were well raised on wild
garlic and onion lily bulbs leaks and
onion leaves
at night while they ate these meager
Foods she told them the stories of her
ancestors the stories that had been
passed down to her from her parents the
stories of Alan the beautiful and her
five unruly sons and the parable of the
Five Arrows that could not be broken so
long as they stayed
together at first the boys seemed to
have taken these lessons to Heart
[Music]
saying to each other we must feed our
mother they sat on mother onan's Muddy
Banks and mastered metal hooks and lur
catching maimed and mly fish turning
needles into hooks they hooked trout and
little white fish they sifted pools for
silver minnows and so they served back
their mothers
it was around this time that tushin met
another boy of the same age whose family
would often camp near to their own
settlement this boy's name was
jamuka the two boys hunted and fished
together and became good friends in fact
they became so close that they swore to
enter into to that Bond of chosen
kinship and became what the Mongols
called Ander a kind of Blood Brother
they most likely spilled a drop of their
blood into a cup of fermented May's milk
and both drank from it swearing an oath
of Eternal Brotherhood and always to
fight on one another's
behalf it must have been hard to imagine
at the time watching these two skinny
boys playing in the hill s or at games
of knuckle bones beside the Great River
but one day they would fight one another
in a bitter Civil War over who would
rule all the people of the
Mongols soon winter came to the step
snow fell and the onon river froze
solid the now reduced family must have
come close to death but finally spring
arrived on the step and the ice on the
grasslands
th but by this time all was not well
among this lonely
family despite their mother's stories
warning them to stay United a bitter
rivalry had always existed between
temoin and Yugi's oldest son Bea who had
been born of another
mother this rivalry would only grow
bitterer as their situation worsened and
hunger set
in as the older and larger boy begar
often took for himself the best of the
fish and birds that they caught until
eventually temoin had had
enough he and his younger brother kasar
soon plotted to kill their older
brother it wasn't just bega's
selfishness that motivated this
decision with their father dead their
mother olun was an unmarried Woman as a
result she was considered available for
marriage and though it might seem
strange to us the most likely candidate
may have been her young stepson
bega traveling to Mongolia a century
later the Venetian explorer Marco Polo
noted this peculiarity of Mongol
marriage
laws the marriage customs of Tartas are
as follows any man may take a hundred
wives if he so please and if he be able
to keep them but the first wife is ever
held most in honor and has the most
legitimate they may marry their cousins
and if a father dies his son may take
any of the wives his mother always
accepted that is to say the eldest son
may do this but no
other if bega married o alun he would
secure his position as the Undisputed
head of the family temoin and kasar were
determined not to let that
happen the pair of them chose their
moment carefully they took their bows
and crept up on bega while he sat on the
hill drawing their bow strings Tau when
he saw them he briefly pleaded for his
life but they didn't listen temoin and
kasar shot him with their arrows and
left his body to lie in the long grass
of the
step when they returned to their tent
their mother saw the murder in their
eyes
for when they came back into the gear
The Madame mother understood it all from
the faces of her two
children
murderers she
shouted when bursting out from my hot
womb he wielded in his hand a black
blood clot like a hound that devours its
own like a panther that pounces against
a cliff like a lion that cannot restrain
its wroth like a wolf that stalks in the
whirling blizzard you killed your own
brother
for when summer came again that year
their old tribe the taut returned
following their seasonal route as
always they must have expected to find
nothing but a ction of whitened bones
littering the step where they had left
the family of olun and her children to
die but they were astonished and a
little concerned to find these young men
and their mother still living by the
side of the river somehow they had clung
to
life this could turn out to be a problem
for the
tyut these boys were becoming stronger
each year and maybe one day they would
be stronger enough to take revenge for
abandoning
them perhaps when the taut heard of
temujin's killing of bega they used this
as an excuse to hunt him down as an
outlaw temoin ran and they chased him
high up into the
mountains fleeing for his life he made
for one peak in particular that held a
great significance the sacred Mountain
named Buran calun
among the rocky slopes strewn with scree
there grow forests of Siberian Larch and
pine where it was possible for him to
hide for a while he evaded them among
the forests Shady depths but the taut
posted guards in a Wide Circle and
slowly closed the net around
him eventually they cornered him and
dragged him back to their Camp as a
prisoner at first the taute planned to
execute temoin but they soon changed
their minds a young strong boy like him
would make a good worker and so they
brought the young man back to live as a
slave in their
Camp to humiliate him they forced him to
wear a heavy wooden board around his
neck this prevented him from eating or
sleeping comfortably and made his status
as a slave known to
everyone it's not known how long he was
held captive here but all that time
tagin must have been thinking of his
bride borter and dreaming that they
would one day be
reunited eventually he saw his chance to
escape
one night the Tai Chute feasted on the
red disc day the 16th of the first moon
of Summer on the banks of the onon as
the sun went
down a feeble youth brought to him to
that Feast as the fellows at the feast
were being sent away he grabbed the
wooden board away from the feeble boy
struck him on the head once with it and
ran he lay down on his back in the
River's Edge the moonlight night as
day with the taute guards combing the
step for him temoin saw only one chance
to escape he leapt into the icy River
and the heavy wooden board acted as a
flotation
device when he climbed out of the water
some way Downstream he found a family of
herdsmen who helped him to remove the
lock on the the heavy piece of wood and
he limped back home to his
family by this time he was a young man
of about
16 olun and his siblings must have been
Overjoyed to see him when he returned
but he had other things on his
mind the first thing he did when he
returned was to ride out to claim his
bride
bter he must have feared the worst that
her father had gone back on his words
and given her to someone else but
perhaps the old Shaman had remembered
his vision and the fire he had seen in
the eyes of that young
boy all those years he had kept his
daughter for the man she was promised to
she and temoin were married they had a
daughter and lived together happily on
the banks of the Onan
River and that is where the story of
temoin might have ended with a happy
family with children and
grandchildren with a quiet death in a
gear tent in the middle of the step and
we would never know his
name but history had other plans and the
step was no place for a quiet
life one day a raiding party of the
Northern Forest people known as the
merket swept down on their camp while
temoin was out
hunting this raid was a perfect example
of the Tangled world of Step rivalries
and blood feuds for in fact these men
were the brothers of chedu the man that
Tan's mother olun had once married and
who had lost his wife to yug with yug
dead these brothers of chilu were taking
their revenge on the man's son in said
they burned his tents and took away his
animals and what possessions he had and
just as yugay had once stolen olun these
merket Raiders now stole his wife bter
away and retreated with her back to the
cover of the Siberian
forests with his small band temoin had
little hope of reclaiming
her but he did have one chance
that was to reach out to the man who had
once been his childhood friend on the
banks of the onon river a man who was
now a rising warrior in the nearby Clan
of the kerit his Ander Blood Brother
jamuka when jamuka saw his old friend
after so many years he was overjoyed but
he must have seen the pain in temujin's
face and when when tamuin told him what
had happened jamuka flew into a rage the
secret history records him giving the
following
promise a black leather Ward drum with
its booming Bellow I have beaten a Steed
with swift steps have I saddled a steel
shirt have I worn a solid spear have I
seized
a stinging arrow on my string have I
strung to slaughter all the Savage
Market I set
out the Lord that jamuka served was a
man named toil Khan the Khan of the kit
people and he agreed to help temoin get
his wife back they spent that year
building an army and set out in the
Autumn with a host over 30,000 strong
riding north into the Hostile forests
where the merkit
lived they waited until Nightfall and
then under cover of Darkness they swept
down on the merket camp in a surprise
attack the secret history records what
happened
[Music]
next
for they swarmed in to seize his girls
in a sudden swoop they plundered his
kingdom
mercilessly as the Merit folk fled down
the Salen River in the night as our
soldiers dogged the heels of The
Fugitive mer kit through the night
plundering and looting and as ujin
called out bter borter they met Madame
borter was there among the fugitives
she recognized ujin's voice got down
from the wagon and ran towards him and
they hugged each other in
welcome there was only one
complication temoin soon found out that
his wife bter had become
pregnant since she had been captured and
forcibly married to a merkit lord temoin
could never know whether the child was
his perhaps for this reason when his
firstborn son came into the world temoin
gave him the name Joi which in Mongolian
means guest perhaps alluding to the
question of his
fatherhood but they all agreed to put
the issue behind them and tamuin
accepted Joi the guest as his eldest
son after this experience it was now
clear to temoin that a life of Peace was
impossible on the
step for protection he and his family
joined jamoka's camp and the pair of
Ander Blood Brothers rode together as
equals for a year and a
half they hunted and fought together and
perhaps even played n bones together the
way they had as
boys jamaka also introduced temoin to
his Lord and Patron the ruler of the
kerit clan the man named toel Khan this
time would have been crucial for
temoan during his upbringing he had
known only hardship and poverty whereas
jamuka had become an experienced Warrior
and
leader he must have taught temoin or all
he
knew for a while everything seemed to be
going well but eventually temoin began
to detect a hint of resentment from his
blood
brother perhaps even a glimmer of
contempt one day jamaka ordered him to
stay home and protect the Clan's sheep
herds a clear sign that things were
beginning to sour between these old
friends
the two quarreled and Tan's wife B
advised him to leave his friend and
start out on his
[Music]
own Madame bter said jamuka Ander is
said to be a person who easily gets
tired of things now the time has come
that he has become tired of us let us
not Pitch Camp let us make a clean break
and move away through the
night with a heavy heart tushin agreed
and he and his family prepared to leave
he would now be starting again from the
beginning alone on the
step he expected to leave with just his
wife and his small children but to his
surprise
he had gained a great deal of popularity
among jamoka's
people in fact when temoin made to leave
jamoka's Camp half of his blood
brother's followers asked to go with
him the Loyalty that temoin clearly
inspired was partly due to his
reputation for
generosity when dividing up the loot
from a successful raid step peoples had
for thousands of years adhered to an
ancient system by which the elites and
Nobles took all the best plunder for
themselves and then divided the rest
among the other men as they saw fit
common people were usually left out of
this
system in the harsh world of the step
strength was everything and the strong
took the Lion's
Share but temoin appears to have been
different he had grown up on the
freezing Bank of the onon river with his
siblings and learned to share everything
in common he had once killed his older
brother begar partly for taking the best
food for himself and since then must
have harbored a distaste for this
ancient system and perhaps he had
learned that inspiring loyalty in those
around him was worth any amount of gold
or any number of horses
as a result he pioneered a new and
somewhat radical system in the world of
the step in his party loot would be
shared according to Merit and those who
did well in battle were given a greater
share even if they were just common
people among his followers he also at
times introduced a kind of insurance
policy decreeing that any Soldier who
was killed in battle would have their
share of the loot given to their Widow
and orphaned children a policy perhaps
inspired by his own experience of losing
his father and being plunged into
poverty as a
child a certain amount of loot was also
distributed to the elderly and
disabled all of this meant that when he
left jamoka's Camp a number of men
wanted to follow him but in taking half
of his blood brother's people temoin had
also gained a powerful
enemy throughout this time the Mongols
were still a fractured and divided
people but now these two rival Warriors
both desired to make themselves ruler
over all the Mongols a title that had
long been known as
Khan in the summer of of
1189 temoin decided to take his chance
he summoned a meeting of the Clans known
as a kurl
Thai a kurl Thai was a riotous event
part political rally and part
Festival this one took place on the
shores of a place on the step known as
the Blue
Lake here the air would be filled with
the sound of horses laughter and perhaps
the mesmerizing sound of Mongolian
throat singing a unique vocal form in
which the singers summon sound from deep
in their larynx with such Precision that
they are able to sing two notes at
once the crural tie would have included
games and feasts the so-called three
manly Pursuits of horse races wrestling
and Arch
tournaments and of course the
consumption of vast quantities of
alcohol it's likely the attendants would
have drunk Iraq or kumus the alcoholic
drink made from fermented May's
milk one Chinese Diplomat named jao gong
who attended a Mongol feast in the early
1220s even records a kind of Mongol
drinking game
they do not end their banqueting until
everyone is roaring drunk every time
they drink wine it is their custom that
those who sit next to each other should
after tasting exchange cups if one's
counterpart holds the cup with one hand
it means that I must taste a mouthful
and only then will he dare to drink if
he holds the cup in both hands then he
wishes to switch cups with me then I
have to drink drink his wine to the
bottom and pour wine to toast him this
made it very easy to get drunk whenever
they see a foreign guest talk
uproariously make noise and act rudely
in a drunken state or else vomit or fall
asleep then they are very happy and say
the guest gets drunk so his heart is one
with
ours but despite the rry the kural Thai
had a very serious purpose by holding
this Gathering of the Clans temoin was
declaring his intention to become KH of
the
Mongols this was not a particularly
prestigious title the Mongols were a
weak and divided people and any Khan who
led them would still pay tribute to the
much more powerful toel Khan of the
kits but it was still a clear
declaration of war against the more like
claimant to the title and the man who
commanded the support of most Mongol
Nobles his own blood brother
jamuka when jamuka heard news about this
kural Tha he must have been
enraged clashes between the two men's
followers
intensified until one day one of juka's
relatives was killed in a cattle
raid this was the excuse he was looking
for to finally go to war and crush his
blood brother
tushin the two sides gathered their
forces temoin would finally meet his
blood brother in battle at a place
called dalan
balut the Mongol Horsemen would have
wheeled around each other in great
thundering packs hailing one another
with arrows before closing in and
clashing with their long
lances we can imagine the Thundering of
the Hooves the cries of the dying men
and horses the whoops and battle cries
and the angry buzzing of arrows through
the
air but here jamoka's greater experience
and years of warrior training easily
overpowered the inexperienced
temoin the secret history reports what
this loss in few
words they formed up into three units
rode against jamuka he was forced back
then by jamuka and escaped into the
Jiran gorge on the Onan
River with temoin defeated the wrath of
jamuka was
terrible in retribution for siding with
the upstart jamuka ordered that 70
princes of the chinoa clan be boiled
alive in great iron
cauldrons one Leader's head was cut off
and jamoka tied it to his horse's tail
and dragged it behind him as he
rode temoin situation was Now worse than
ever he was now an outlaw and fled for
his life with the Riders of jamuka hot
on his
heels he would not return to the step
for another 10 years and those years are
a gap in his
biography but some historians think it
likely that he went South to the lands
that lay across the Great expanse of the
GOI desert a domain of large wealthy
cities artists Merchants poets and
emperors
the lands of
China China at the end of the 12th
century was a divided
land since the days of the first
Emperors of the chin and Han Dynasty the
settled people who lived in the flood
Plains around the yangs and yellow
Rivers had fought bitterly with the
nomadic horse riding peoples of the step
and since that time China's Emperors had
built numerous defenses on their
northern border that would become known
as The Great
Wall in the nearly 10 centuries since
the time of the Han Dynasty the Tang
were the first to unite the area of the
central Chinese Plains but after after
the collapse of that dynasty a period of
chaos and dissolution followed known as
the five dynasties and 10 kingdoms
period eventually around the year 1,000
the plains of China United once more
Under the Sun
Dynasty the sun were ethnically hand
Chinese the majority ethnic group of
China and under their reign the people
of the central plains had flourished
over the next 100 years China's
population would double so that by the
year 1100 more than 100 million people
or 1/3 of the planet's entire human
population could be found
there China at this time was the
Undisputed center of the world and
technologically the most advanced
civilization on
Earth but in the 1120s disaster struck
the juren were a people from the Oak and
pine forests of Manchuria near the
border with Korea where Siberian tigers
were known to Rome and to the Chinese in
the South these churen were considered
barbarians they were mostly not nomadic
and lived in villages but they were a
horse rearing people and they rode and
fought as horse archers
in much the same way as the
Mongols once subservient to another
Manchurian people known as the kitan
they had overthrown their former Masters
and now swept across northern China in a
tide of
Conquest the Chinese Sun Dynasty
weakened by internal divisions and taken
by surprise could do little to stop
them in a disaster that the S would R
for centuries Juran Horsemen swept South
and seized the lands around the northern
Yellow River pushing South and even
capturing the former Sun capital of
Kang from this point onwards the lands
of northern China would be ruled by
these J Chen and their new emperor would
Crown himself with a title that elevated
him above the other peoples of the step
he was now the the golden Khan and his
Empire would be known as the Jinn or
Golden
Empire the Juran Jinn dynasty of
northern China was what has been called
a conquest Dynasty that is one founded
by outside
Invaders but throughout Chinese history
these kinds of conquerors had always
learned that military might was not the
only kind of power that culture too had
its own kind of
force over time the founders of these
Conquest dynasties often adopted the
Chinese language began to live by
Confucian ideals and dress in Chinese
clothes into marry with the locals and
gradually become every bit as Chinese as
the
Chinese the juren were no different in
fact over the century that they ruled
northern China they adopted the Chinese
language so enthusiastically that very
few written texts in the juren language
have
survived just 30 years after their
Conquest one Jin Emperor known as the
prince of Hing even began writing
Chinese poetry and drinking Chinese tea
something that his Hardy forbears would
have
mocked but no matter how many Chinese
maners or Customs they adopted the Jin
would always be considered outside
barbarians by the Sun Chinese in the
South who referred to them as slaves and
dog sheep and dreamed of one day
retaking their lost lands and uniting
China once
more for the next two centuries China
would be divided into these two halves
the Chinese sung in the rugged and
tropical South and the juren Jin in the
dry and arid North with their border
along the haai River roughly halfway
between the Yang SE and yellow Rivers
there was almost constant Warfare
between them as they seized Forts and
Border towns from one another whenever
the opportunity arose but neither side
was ever able to gain the upper
hand since they themselves had once
swept out of the Wilderness and seized
the cities of China the juren rulers of
the Jinn Dynasty knew all too well how
quickly a new threat could develop in
those wild lands and they were
determined not to be caught by surprise
as the sun had
been as a result the Jinn operated a
policy of using Nomads to fight
Nomads on their Frontier the Jinn
Dynasty employed what were called
Jin these were their border guards
vassals and subject States along with
Mercenaries who they paid handsomely to
create a buffer zone between them and
the other peoples of the
north these Jian border guards would
raid and plunder other step peoples
whenever they became too powerful and
suppressed any chance of a United Power
emerging in the Mongolian step and when
any one group of J Yin themselves became
too powerful the Jin would shift their
support to a different people and bring
them tumbling down in
turn the southern Chinese writer jao
gong recounts this practice with the
usual Su contempt for their Northern
Rivals when the tartter were in their
original countries during the Jin
coward's Reign there was a rumor spoken
the tartars are
coming every 3 years they would dispatch
troops to the farthest Frontiers and
Wast of the North to destroy and kill
and called it decreasing the number of
fighting men the tartar fled and
concealed themselves in the Sandy
deserts and hatred entered the marrow of
their
bones this brutal policy had been
remarkably
successful constantly beset by punitive
raids the peoples of the North like the
Mongols had remained bitterly divided
crippled by Blood feuds and rivalries of
which the life of temoin gives just a
glimpse jao gong describes the chaotic
state of the step during this
time at present the Tartas are very
simple and wild and they have almost no
institutions I have studied and
researched this and have found that they
prosper and decline rise and are
destroyed with no regularity
the brutal Jin policy had created
immense hardship but they also provided
something of a safety net for any group
facing extinction in the step there
always remained this one way of
surviving to enter the service of the
Jin and defend the borders of their
empire it's thought that after losing
his battle with jamuka temoin may have
fled South into the Borderlands of the
Jin Empire with what remained of his
followers and there sold his Services as
a
Jin if this is where temoin spent those
10 years then it's here that he would
hone his skills as a leader and
strategist and he would learn lessons in
brutality in the winter of
1196 the Jin paid him to attack the
wealthy these step people known as the
tatars the tatars had actually been Jan
border guards themselves and had grown
Rich from all the loot they had
plundered on behalf of the Jinn but now
the Jinn Dynasty feared that their loyal
attack dogs had become too
powerful they employed temoin Mongols
and their overlords the powerful kerit
people to attack the tartars and reduce
any threat rat they might eventually
pose since the tatars had once poisoned
his father temoin must have been all too
happy to accept as the secret history
recalls when he learned the news tagin
said from Days of old the Tarts have
been a hateful folk who murdered the
grandfathers and fathers in this
opportunity let us join in on this
attack
the ruler of the kits toil Khan also had
reason to hate the
Tatar he had once been the Ander or
Blood Brother of osan's murdered father
yesugay and in this period would become
something of a father figure to
temoin together they rode out against
their joint enemy and in a surprise
attack swept into tataa lands and
plundered them mercil
lessly the Mongols were Amazed by the
rich trade goods They seized from the
tents and treasure carts of the
Tartas they noticed that even the
children of the Tartas had gold rings in
their noses and wore Sable cloaks
stitched with
gold the Jin Dynasty were delighted with
Tan's work and promoted him to the rank
of juta or pacification officer
looting the tartars brought his band
great wealth and doubtless more
followers too and it solidified his
relationship with the powerful tgril
Khan from this point on temoin became
his right-hand man and his power began
to
grow one people known as the jurkin had
raided some of tushin camps while he was
away on his war with the tatas
and so when he returned home he rounded
on them but instead of Simply taking
their animals and chasing them off as
was usually the way on the step he
rounded up their leadership and executed
everyone then to the common people of
the jerkin he gave an offer to join the
Mongols not as slaves as would have been
usual but as members of the
clan he even gave his mother an orphan
jerkin boy to adopt symbolically
accepting him as his
brother the jerkin must have been
perplexed but many of them accepted his
deal this was a new way of doing things
on the step and suddenly the established
Elite of Mongolia began to get
nervous these old powerful car
rallied around the one person they
thought could challenge temoin in fact
the only man who had ever beaten him in
battle his own blood brother
jamuka these old KHS gathered and
crowned jamuka with an ancient and
powerful title gur Khan meaning
something like Khan over
Khan's the only thing standing between
jamoka and his final victory was tamuin
when tamuin and jamoka met in battle for
the final time the year was
1201 both sides gathered their Horsemen
who by now would have numbered in the
many
thousands Wars in Mongolia were fought
with horse and spear with bow and arrow
and
sword one Chinese chronicler Pang da
writes an account of the typical
equipment of of a Mongol
Warrior their weapons and armor consist
of scale armor chain mail with leather
six layers deep and tough sheep horn
bows they Whittle wood for the shafts
and take down birds of prey for the
feathers their scimitars follow the
Westerner style light and sharp they
have long and short Spears with tips
like drills so that what is Spears does
not slip off and they can penetrate
heavy armor they have defensive Shields
of short stemmed bamboo or else of
Willow tied with
leather but as well as these physical
weapons battles in Mongolia were also
fought with
magic both sides would bring their most
powerful shamans to the battlefield and
these holy men were considered to have
exceptional abilities at their disposal
to turn away enemy arrows cause their
Shields and bow strings to break and
even use enchanted stones to control the
weather the great respect that all
Mongols held for these shamans meant
that they actually had a very real
psychological effect on the
battlefield in a narrow contest that
could go either way an impressive
display of shamanic power
could even make the difference between
an army standing and fighting or
panicking and running between Victory
and
defeat on the day of the battle as the
horsemen clashed and arrows flew in
angry swarms through the air it was
temoin shamans who seemed to win the
day as the battle wore on the clouds
darkened and a great step storm swept
down over the Blood Stained grassland
when they were pushing each other back
and forth up and down the slope and
reforming their own ranks at that very
moment the shamans of jamuka performed
the weather Stone magic but the weather
magic reversed and the magic fell on
themselves then saying to each other
Heaven is not pleased with us they
scattered
jamoka now fled just as tushin once
had over the next few years he would
regroup with some of his men but many
could now see which way the wind was
blowing some of jamoka's followers
betrayed him hoping that if they handed
him over to temoin they would Curry
favor with the new ascendant lord of the
step when they came to temoin with their
captive however they were
disappointed for their reward temoin had
them all put to death condemning them in
the following
terms people who laid hands on their own
ruler how could they be allowed to live
who would befriend such
people execute them all down to their
offspring
but his rival jamuka could not be
allowed to
live despite their sworn Bond temoin
ordered that he be
killed perhaps as a sign of the love
they had once held for one another the
deed was done in the most noble manner
according to Mongol tradition that is
without shedding any of his
blood jamoka was likely strangled or his
back back broken and his body was
buried with the killing of jamoka osan's
childhood died too and a new man was
born the war of the KHS had come to an
end and now tushin claim to be KH of all
the Mongols faced no opposition before
long other peoples of the step fell
before his Horsemen the nimon the jadan
the oat the taichu and the tatas
in each clan that fell to him the elites
and Nobles were killed but as with the
jerkin the commoners were absorbed into
the Mongol Army and temujin's mother o
alun would ceremoniously adopt an
orphaned child of their people as temo
Jin's brother as a system it was
immensely symbolic and ruthlessly
effective eventually even his mentor
togel the KH of the kit recognized how
powerful his prote had become he turned
on temoin and tried to have him killed
but he too was swept
aside now around the age of 70 tgril Was
Defeated at a clash remembered as the
Battle of The Burning
Sands now there was no one left to stand
in temujin's way temoin was the
Undisputed Overlord of virtually all the
peoples of Mongolia and the commander of
as many as a 100,000
Horsemen in a grand kural Thai ceremony
in the year 1206 he gathered all the
peoples he had conquered and declared
himself the emperor of the Eastern
step when he was crowned he chose to
rule not with the old traditional title
of gurhan that jamuka had chosen but
with a new
title this title would symbolize that
things in the world of the step were
about to change that temoin would be the
kind of ruler that Asia had never seen
before the meaning of this title is much
debated and meant something like great
Khan righteous king or Oceanic
Emperor but soon it would be known all
around the world a title that in the
Mongolian language was pronounced
chingis Khan
[Music]
the title that tamuin chose to rule
under has suffered much from translation
Through the
Ages from Mongolian it entered the
Persian language relatively unscathed as
chenis Khan but when these sources were
translated into Arabic the confusion
began Arabic has no CH H CH sound and so
they used their letter J to make it
jengis Gan European scholars would later
translate these sources into Latin and
eventually into English in the 19th
century at which time the translators
used the letter G to denote a soft sound
like in general or
German but due to the ambiguous
pronunciation of the letter g in English
this soon led to an extremely common
mispronunciation genis
Khan the mispronunciation is so
widespread today that genis Khan has
arguably become the standard way that
the name is pronounced in English but
for the sake of correctness in this
episode I will pronounce the name
chingis as it is said in Mongolia
today beyond the pronunciation of his
name much else is mysterious about the
figure of chingis Khan not least his
appearance no artistic representations
were ever made of him during his life or
by anyone who met him as a result those
imaginary depictions we do have are
deeply influenced Ed by the artist's
cultural
background in one Chinese portrait of
the great Khan made after his death he
appears painted like a Chinese emperor
wearing a white Mongolian style robe and
with hooped earrings in his
ears meanwhile in the Persian miniature
paintings he is depicted wearing a great
Golden Crown or later as a Persian
Prince with a feathered turban necklaces
of pearls or dressed in fine silk and
brocades in Europe too he would be
depicted with European features with
fine fur cloaks and a gown of flowing
silk sporting a handsome
mustache written descriptions of him
could be no less
fragmentary the Chinese writer jao gong
writes one rare account of his
appearance
on the whole the Tarts are not very tall
the tallest not exceeding 5 ft and 3 or
4 in they grow extremely little facial
hair the tartar Lord uin differs in that
he is of a large and noble bearing with
a broad forehead and long whiskers and
cuts a heroic robust
figure the 13th century Persian writer
Minaj alaj Juani writes another rare
description of what he looked like
although he got his account third hand
and never saw the great KH
himself a man of tall stature of
vigorous build robust in body the hair
on his face scanty and turned white with
Cat's Eyes possessed of dedicated energy
discernment genius and understanding or
striking a butcher just Resolute an
overthrower of enemies Intrepid
bloodthirsty and cruel he was Adept at
Magic and deception and some of the
Devils were his
friends historians have never settled
exactly what jujan means when he says
that chingis Khan had Cat's
Eyes this may have referred to the
epicanthic holds that are typical of the
faces of Mongolians and many peoples in
East Asia and may have been worthy of
mention to the Persian
chronicler but it may also indicate that
chingis Khan had a striking and unusual
eye color perhaps a bright yellow that
occurs in rare cases with a higher
incidence in East
Asia throughout these sources chingis
Khan is elusive insubstantial and
mysterious but the changes he brought
about in the world would be immense and
after conquering much of the world of
the step the man who was once temoin
began the work of building a state
the Empire that chingis Khan would Forge
he would call the Y Mongol Ulus or the
great Mongol state but he also referred
to it informally and affectionately as
the people of the felt walls referring
to the felt tents that characterized the
nomadic way of
life the empire was a vast Confederation
covering a land area roughly the size of
West Europe and comprising at least 1
million people and probably 20 million
herd
animals but it was an Empire of grass an
Empire without cities without Governors
or
administrators to make sense of this
organizational nightmare chingis Khan
embarked on a dramatic restructuring of
Mongol
Society he would tear out the old system
of Clan loyalties and replace it with
one based around the
military he organized his Warriors
according to an old decimal system that
had been used for centuries on the step
going back to the time of the Shong nuu
his soldiers were placed into squads of
10 men called an arban who lived
together and fought as
brothers these squads were typically led
by the eldest
Man 10 of these arban joined together to
make a zagon or 100 men and these
hundred voted to choose its leader 10
zagon made a mingan or a thousand men
and 10 mingan made a tuman an army of
10,000 Mongol
Horsemen this was considered to be a
practical size large enough to be
effective in battle but not so large
that it could not move quickly or ran
into into problems with
Supply the leaders of these two men were
chosen by temoin
personally in this way the old messy
Clan system which had fostered
infighting and backstabbing had been
replaced by a regimented system that
promoted coordination and
cooperation the Persian scholar atalik
juvani writing in the service of the
Mongols in the 1250s gushes about the
great success of these
reforms God Almighty in wisdom and
intelligence distinguished jingus Khan
in alertness of mind and absoluteness of
power and exalted him above all the
kings of the world so that all that had
been recorded touching the ways of the
Pharaohs and Caesars was by chingus Khan
invented from the page of his own
mind he established a rule for every
occasion and a regulation for every
circumstance while for every crime he
fixed a
penalty every Mongol of all ages and
genders were now required to give one
day a week of Public Service either in
the army or working on public
projects these could be hering animals
and collecting milk Gathering dung for
fuel or making felt from
wool sometimes their service could
simply be to serve food at a feast or to
sing and entertain the
troops chingis Khan worked to end the
feuding that had for centuries defined
the harsh reality of Mongol life
previously the only Justice on the step
was the Vengeance you could exact on
those who wronged you which had the
tendency to bring about cycles of
reprisal and violence that echoed down
the
generations but temoin introduced a
series of laws that he would call the
Great Law or
yasa since the Mongols had no written
script they adopted the writing system
of the nearby weager people and copied
these laws down in a series of books
with bright blue bindings as the Persian
scholar juvani
recalls these roles are called the Great
Book of the yasa and are kept in the
treasury of the chief princes whenever a
k ascends the throne or a great Army is
mobilized or the princes assemble and
begin to consult together concerning
Affairs of state and the administration
thereof they produce these roles and
model their actions
thereon each one of the new laws that
chingas Khan wrote seemed to be directly
influenced by his own experiences in
earlier life one of his first laws was
to forbid the kidnapping of women on the
Mongol step he had come close to losing
his wife bter in this way and knew the
pain of it firsthand and his own mother
o alun had been kidnapped by his
father in this way it must have been a
deeply personal issue but kidnapping was
also one of the main causes of friction
on the step and had sparked countless
bitter feuds outlawing it completely
would bring peace where before there had
been only
conflict he also outlawed The Taking of
other Mongols as
slaves after being kept as a slave by
the taut this issue seems to have Arisen
from his own bitter memories although
there would be no law against taking
slaves from other step peoples
he also outlawed the theft of animals
and brought in regulations on when
people could hunt Banning hunting
throughout the breeding season so that
stocks of game animals would not become
depleted finally he began the
introduction of what would become a law
that guaranteed a degree of religious
protection to his subjects perhaps the
first law of its kind in the Middle Ages
as juv
records being the adherent of no
religion and the follower of no Creed he
rejected bigotry and the preference of
One Faith to another and the placing of
some above others rather he honored and
respected the learned and the pious of
every sect recognizing such conduct as
the way of the court of
God these laws may sound idealistic to
us today but they were also
pragmatic religious conflicts could
cause ruptures between different
families and Clans and damage the
cohesion of the Empire but now all the
step peoples whether Muslim Christian
Buddhist or like him a worshipper of
tangri and the Great Blue Sky would all
share equal protection under the
law certain religious practices like the
slaughter of halal meat were outlawed
sometimes on penalty of death so it has
been contested how much we can really
call this religious freedom but it was
still a radical new vision for what kind
of state the Mongol Empire could
be on top of these reforms
chingis Khan created a new inner
Heartland for the
Empire this was the original homeland of
the Mongols the region where the rivers
onon Ken and tul found their source and
where he at once sheltered from the taut
Warriors who had hunted
him this was the land centered around
the mountain Buran
calun only members of his close family
and inner Court were allowed owed to
venture into this private land and it
was here that Mongol royalty would bury
their dead for centuries to
come at the head of Mongol Society sat
chingis Khan and his inner Court which
in Mongolian was known as an Ordu a word
that means something like great tent and
is the origin of the English word horde
the word Mongol itself has a somewhat
uncertain origin perhaps deriving from
the Mongolian phrase monke tangri gal
meaning Eternal Sky fire or from the
word mongu meaning
silver it had been used for some time
about all the scattered Clans like
yesugay and tushin but now everyone who
lived in the empire was considered a
Mongol citizen
but much to the Mongols frustration they
struggled to get anyone outside of the
step to call them by that
name for much of their history people in
China Persia the Middle East and Europe
all insisted on calling them by the name
of what had been up until then the
largest and most powerful of the step
peoples the
tartars they did this sometimes out of
calculated disrespect and and sometimes
out of genuine confusion and despite
Mongol insistence that they were not
tatars but Mongols the name
stuck still despite all the reforms of
chingis Khan Mongol Society still
remained a fragile entity and its people
still lived lives of poverty and
subsistence in the harsh land of the
step chingis Khan knew that his people
would remain united only as long as they
had an enemy to fight together and if no
such enemy arose they would return to
their old ways fight one another and
tear his new Empire
apart partly for this reason he began to
cast his gaze beyond the high plateau of
the Mongolian step and hunger for Wars
of conquest and the riches they could
bring
while the Jin and S divided the river
plains of China between them there was a
third smaller Kingdom to their West
known as the Western
sea this this was located partly in the
hilly upper reaches of the Yellow River
and the dry desert regions to the north
of the Tibetan Plateau known as the
hershe
corridor this had been a strategic trade
route for the past thousand years since
the time of the Han Dynasty and it's
through this narrow passage that the
vast majority of Silk Road Goods passed
on huge Caravans of boryan camels
like the Jinn the Western sea were a
conquest Dynasty ruled by a people known
as the tanguts nomadic Buddhists from
the region of
Tibet their society was a hybd including
both nomadic herders not unlike the
Mongols and settled cities full of
Chinese turkic and Tibetan peoples with
a booming Economy based on Silk Road tra
this was the smallest and weakest
Kingdom bordering the step and it had
recently sheltered some enemies of
chingis Khan who had fled from his
Conquest for this reason the tanguts
were the first Prey Upon which he set
his
sights at first the Mongols initiated a
series of raids on their border forts
testing their defenses
but in the year 1209 chingis Khan
gathered his horde and descended on
their
borders when they got news that the KH
was marching on their lands the tanguts
sent out Messengers begging for help
from their neighbors the powerful Jin
and Song dynasties in in the South but
neither the Jin nor the S sent any
Aid the ruler of the Jinn Dynasty known
as Prince Sha of way is even recorded to
have sent the following dismissive
reply it is to our advantage when our
enemies attack one another wherein lies
the danger to
us as we will see this pattern would
repeat itself in almost all the lands
that the Mongols arrived in at various
points a coordinated and United response
might have stopped their advance but
everywhere local rivalries prevented
anyone from uniting against
them in the desert regions the Mongols
easily overwhelmed the tangut armies but
the walled cities of Western sea proved
to be a much greater obstacle the the
Mongols had no Siege equipment no
ladders or battering rams no catapults
or engineers and so all they could do
was surround the fortresses gaze up at
their towering walls and try to starve
the tangut people into
surrender this was highly unpalatable
for Mongol Warriors who delighted in
moving quickly striking fast and always
finding new grasslands for their horses
the Mongols encircled the tanguts in
their capital of yinchuan but it was a
powerful Fortress guarded by an army of
150,000 soldiers at the sight of the
Mongol Army the tanguts simply
disappeared behind their walls and
refused to be baited out for battle in
an act of desperation at one point the
Mongols even attempted to Dam the Yellow
River in the hope of redirecting it into
the city flooding it and undermining the
foundations of its walls but the river
instead flooded the Mongols
Camp still the tanguts had had enough of
the destruction and soon sued for
peace the secret history of the Mongols
records their plea to the great
KH
for if changus KH shows us favor then we
the Tang good people shall bring forth
many camels reared in the shelter of the
tall feather grass we shall weave Woolen
material and make satin and then we
shall give them to you training Falcons
to fly loose at game We Shall Gather
them and all the best ones we shall send
to you
sources in southern Sun China recorded
the subjugation of the tanguts with a
mixture of contempt and
amusement from their perspective a hated
rival had been bested by mere
barbarians the song writer Lee sinan
records this event with a
sneer the black tartars became became
increasingly powerful having gradually
unified the clan lands they then raised
a great Army and attacked
heri within several years all the
districts and prefectures of heri had
been
sacked they even forcibly carried off a
false princess of the Shia Kingdom in
departing and the Shia actually had to
serve them as
[Music]
vassals in the decades that followed the
situation would not seem so amusing to
the
song the conquest of the western seia
had proven the effectiveness of the
Mongol war machine but it had also
exposed a number of glaring
weaknesses walled cities had frustrated
and slowed the Mongol advance and it
became clear that if they hoped to
tackle even larger prey something would
have to change
one Chinese writer Ting records how the
Mongol conquest of the tanguts set the
stage for ever greater
expansion the tartars in the beginning
were primitively ignorant and lacked
even a single of the known crafts only
later when they conquered the westerners
did they begin to have products
Craftsmen and
mechanisms the craftsmanship of the
westerners is extremely
refined especially fine are their
instruments of Siege
Warfare but the tanguts simply ruled
over the trade Corridor that transported
the goods from east to west chingis Khan
knew that even greater wealth could be
found in the lands where those goods
were actually produced the lands of
China all he needed was an excuse for
war and that would come with the death
of the golden KH of the Jin Dynasty in
the year 1208
ad when the old golden khah of the Jinn
died his young son Prince Sha of Wei
took the
throne this young man had heard of the
rise of chingis Khan to the north of the
GOI desert
the mysterious character who had United
the peoples of the step but it had so
far not particularly troubled him other
than the annoying fact that this new
ruler had stopped paying him
tribute the new golden KH ruled a
sprawling Empire of more than 50 million
people perhaps the most populous and
Powerful in the world at the
time their armies totaled six 100,000
men mostly comprised of armored pikemen
and
crossbowmen they commanded perhaps the
most technologically advanced forces on
Earth even experimenting with early
gunpowder weaponry and on top of that
their step routs in the region of
Manchuria meant that they still fielded
a mighty Cavalry force of more than
150,000 Horsemen dispersed as Cavalry
divisions among their various
armies the Mongols looked weak in
comparison their forces totaled no more
than about 100,000 horse archers with
not a single foot soldier among them and
the Jin were confident that no one could
lead an army across the GOI desert large
enough to threaten them for this reason
this young Jin Emperor had every reason
to be confident
One S Chinese writer jao gong recalls
their
attitude the Jinn said about the tartter
our country is like the sea your country
is like two handfuls of sand how could
you shake us the tartar to this day
young and old can all remember these
words it's perhaps this confidence that
would lead to the terrible mistake he
would make in the year 1210
ad every new emperor began his Reign by
sending out envoys to the Empire's
subjects those kingdoms and peoples who
had sworn allegiance to his father to
ask them to swear loyalty to him in turn
and recommit to whatever tribute they
had previously been paying
as part of this process he sent one
Envoy across the GOI desert to demand
that their previous jwen Border guard
chingis Khan come South and make a
gesture of loyalty and submission to the
new golden Khan of the
Jinn when the envoys arrived they would
have met with chingis Khan who was now
nearly 50 years
old if he had ever seen the value in
bowing and scraping to the Lords of the
South those days were now very much
behind him when the Chinese envoys met
him they asked him to send word of his
submission to the
Jin the later Chinese Source the Yuan
shei describes what happened
next chingas Khan asked the Jin
Messengers who is the new emperor The
Messengers of the emperor replied the
prince of why jingus Khan turned his
face to the South spat in that direction
and said I thought that the emperor of
the Middle Kingdom should be a man
blessed by Heaven can he be such an
ordinary and weak man why should I show
him respect then he mounted his horse
and rode to the
north the Jin envoys left shaken at
their encounter and chingis Khan
deliberated on his course of
action his insult to the Jinn would
likely bring a military response that is
unless he moved
first but he must have been full of
doubts and fears about taking on such a
powerful
enemy to find the best course of action
he would need to speak to his
God to do this he climed climbed up the
slopes of the Sacred Mountain Buran
calun through the forests of large and
elegant Siberian Pine and there on its
Stony Peak surrounded by Twisted rock
formations he prayed to tangri the god
of the Great Blue Sky to ask him what to
do according to the secret history when
the sun rose on the fourth day chingis
Khan emerged with his
answer the Eternal blue sky has promised
us Victory and
Vengeance in the spring of
1211 the vast horde of the Mongols
gathered and set out on its March South
across the GOI
desert the sight of this force would
have been terrifying
overhead penants and Banners flew and at
the head of the army flew the great
spirit Banner of chingis Khan woven from
the tail hairs of hundreds of black
horses every Mongol Warrior rode with
five spare mounts at a time so with an
army of 100,000 Horsemen they would have
brought with them an extra half a
million horses and probably the same
number of sheep and goats
with them also came giant Supply carts
pulled by as many as 20 oxen and
thousands of ban camels some carrying
enormous drums that were beaten to
Signal the men and rally them for
battle this was an invasion Force but it
was also a mass migration an enormous
traveling City designed to flatten
everything in its path
the people who would have stood and
watched this pandemonium approaching
across the desert in a great cloud of
dust were known as the
onut they were a desert people that for
years had been serving as Jin border
guards for the Jin keeping their empire
safe from Step
Raiders but upon seeing the enormous
Mongol Army approaching the onut
reassessed their position position these
border Nomads welcomed the Mongols as
brothers and even showed them the most
direct route South through the narrow
mountain passes right into the heart of
the Jin
lands the invasion of China had
begun the Mongols strategy was always to
attack in multiple places at once sewing
maximum fear and confusion and giving
the appearance that their forces were
much more numerous than they were for
this reason while chingis Khan LED his
forces in the west his general jebe led
an army into the
East the Sun Chinese writer jao gong
describes what happened next
tumin indignant over their bullying and
insults invaded the
frontier the frontier prefectures were
all conquered and their people
killed the Mongols took these border
Forts and then crossed through the
mountains they first met Jin resistance
at a place called Badger mouth pass and
and there they smashed the Jin Army sent
to face
them the Mongols broke through the
mountains by Autumn of 1211 and Spilled
Out into the Chinese
Heartland for the next 3 years the
Mongols pillaged the entire North China
plane and for much of this time the Jin
were powerless to stop them
part of the reason for this was the
immense mobility of mongal
armies Jin armies were enormous and well
equipped but they were also slow
typically containing twice as many
infantry as Cavalry they lumbered across
the land at a snail's pace and needed to
be constantly supplied with food brought
by wagon along precarious supply routes
meanwhile the Mongols could disappear
and reappear anywhere they liked
allowing them to Ambush and Destroy
whole Jin armies in the
field and everything the Mongols needed
they brought with them their horseback
armies lived on milk and meat from their
animals and in times of difficulty would
even open up a vein on their horses
necks and drink the blood directly from
their mounts
they would Place strips of raw meat
under their saddles in the morning so
that the flesh was tenderized throughout
the day of riding so that it could be
eaten raw in the evening in this way
they could camp without lighting fires
that would give away their position to
enemy
Scouts one Jin officer Tu shanii gave
the following appraisal of the desperate
situation since the Mongolian Army is on
Horseback it goes into the plane in only
one body but we defend ourselves
divided our defeat is
certain the Mongols relied on surprise
and deception in a way that completely
blindsided the Jinn generals who
conducted their Wars according to a long
established system of Martial honor one
Sun Chinese writer named Pang da
describes their array of inventive and
unscrupulous
tactics the Tartas do things that are
not addressed in the ancient techniques
if the enemy puts up a strong defense
that all the tata's plans fail to
penetrate they drive cattle at them or
lash Wild Horses to W them using animals
to disturb the enemy's ranks seldom does
it fail to defeat them when their own
troops are few sometimes the tartars
will drag branches behind them making
dust rise to the heavens and leading the
enemy to suspect that their troops are
many when Victorious they dog the
enemy's tail until the last man is
killed not permitting any to escape but
if they are the ones defeated they
scatter in all four directions Beyond
Pursuit the Mongols had learned how to
turn the jyn's great strengths against
them one of these strengths was their
large population and the other their
powerful walled cities but these could
also be
weaknesses the Mongols exploited these
by borrowing tactics that they had
learned hunting animals on the
step they would devastate the
countryside for miles around which drove
vast numbers of refugees towards the
only safe places left
the walled
cities soon they would be flooded with
desperate and hungry people and their
storehouses ran out of food these Mighty
fortresses now became tombs from which
no one could
escape the Mongols also rounded up huge
numbers of peasants from the countryside
and forc them to work filling in
defensive ditches and moats pushing ing
Siege engines and dismantling the city's
defenses each Mongol Warrior was tasked
with Gathering up 10 peasants for this
purpose The Defenders on the city walls
were left with the brutal choice of
allowing their defenses to be destroyed
by these unwilling laborers or using up
their arrows to slaughter their own
people the Chinese writer Lee sinuan
describ Des cribes this ruthless
tactic in the cities villagers were
drafted as soldiers and sent up onto the
walls to defend them the tartars drove
their family members onto the attack and
Fathers and Sons and older and younger
brothers would often shout at each other
from afar in mutual recognition for this
reason the people had no will to fight
and all the all towns that the Tartas
reached surrendered at the first drum
roll prisoners of War were also
conscripted to fight for their Mongol
captors with the promise that if they
Pro themselves in battle they would be
freed and allowed to join the Mongol
Army but despite their reputation for
brutality chingis Khan and his Warriors
also practiced the judicious use of of
restraint sieges were costly and timec
consuming and he hoped that by showing
Mercy to those cities that surrendered
without a fight he would increase the
likelihood of others doing the
same cities that opened their gates to
the Mongols were thoroughly looted of
their treasure but their people were
spared still those cities that resisted
were slaughtered mercilessly and in the
Countryside the death and destruction
was rampant as Lee sinan
describes the massacre of the people was
almost total gold silk boys girls cattle
sheep horses and other livestock all
were rolled up like a mat and carried
off houses and Cottages were burned down
the walls and ramparts became deserted
ruins
it's likely that the Mongols had not
intended to undertake a full invasion of
China but more like a series of large
raids into these wealthy lands but the
more success they met with the longer
they decided to
stay as the war entered its second and
third years and the Mongol armies still
rampaged unchecked the Jin became
desperate
they began drafting civilians into their
army on mass and even pardoned any
criminal who would take up arms and
fight but the Mongols could not be
stopped soon they were pushing far
enough South to reach the Jinn capital
on the site of modern Beijing then known
as
jungu they laid eyes on the walls of the
city in the year
1214 3 years after the war had
started Beijing at the time was among
the largest cities on Earth records show
that it had a population of nearly a
million people and was defended by an 18
kilm rectangle of rammed Earth walls
rising up to 12 M High broken by 12
gates and 900 guard towers ringed by a
triple moat
its walls were topped with powerful
crossbows and trebuchets capable of
hurling projectiles more than 300
M the Mongols laid Siege of the city but
had little success in breaking through
its
defenses even for them this final prize
must have seemed like a step too
far they were now dangerously
overstretched a long way from home and
facing some of the world's most
formidable
fortifications on top of that the
climate didn't suit them summer in this
part of the world was hot and plague was
beginning to spread among their army
their men and horses were exhausted and
they increasingly longed to return to
the cool lands of
Mongolia chingis Khan sent word to the
Jinn emperor that he was willing to
accept terms for peace with the
following demands for
tribute God has made you so weak that
should I further molest you I fear how
Heaven would judge
me I'm willing to withdraw my Army what
provision will you make to still the
demands of my
officers many in the Jin Court urged the
emperor to to keep
fighting they argued that the shame of
surrendering to these barbarians would
be too great for the dynasty to bear and
the City of Beijing could never be taken
while a determined Force defended it but
luckily for the Mongols the political
situation in the jyn empire was rapidly
disintegrating having lost the
confidence of his court after 2 years of
failure the young golden KH of the Jin
the prince of Wei had been assassinated
the year earlier and his nephew was
placed on the throne by a military
coup this man named suan Jong of Jinn
was now facing another plot in the
palace that threatened to topple
him rather than deal with both the
Mongols and his own treacherous
courtiers he decided to finally sue for
peace he accepted a humiliating series
of conditions recognizing himself as a
vassel to chingis Khan giving the Khan
one of his daughters to marry and
massive amounts of Gold Silver and silk
along with 500 young men and women of
the court to take away as
slaves with these crushing terms the war
came to an end the lands of northern
China breathed a sigh of relief and the
Mongols rode north towards the GOI
desert and
home the Jin Emperor had seemingly
averted further disaster but he would
soon make a critical
mistake summer was still here and the
GOI desert was too hot to cross for that
reason chingis Khan camped on the
southern side of the desert and waited
for the cool months to come before they
could return to Mongolia with the vast
Treasure of their successful ful raid in
tow but then the KH got news of
something that would send him flying
into a
rage word reached him that the new Jinn
Emperor was fleeing
Beijing the embattled ruler was taking
his forces and what remained of his
treasury with him and retreating far
into the South to the old fortress of
Kang on the other side of the Yellow
River
an obstacle that the Mongols had not yet
been able to
cross this seemed like a clear sign that
the Jin did not intend to keep their
word one chronicler recalls the enraged
words of chingis
Khan the Jin emperor made an agreement
with me but now he has moved his Capital
South evidently he mistrusts my word and
has used the PE to deceive
me instead of crossing the desert and
returning to his own lands chingis Khan
wheeled his forces back around and
marched once again to the capital of
Beijing the writer Lee sinan describes
what happened
next in moon five the Jin ruler moved
the capital to
kyang the tartars heard about this and
said to move right away after making
peace this shows they are suspicious and
still Harbor resentment they purposely
talked peace only as a means to forall
us in the Autumn moon8 they again LED
troops to attack the counties and
prefectures of the central
plains with the emperor gone along with
all his personal troops the city's
people were left all but
defenseless the remaining citizens
Garrison of Beijing held out for eight
agonizing months of
Siege starvation soon
spread the Jin made several attempts to
relieve the city from the South but each
army they sent was intercepted and
ambushed on the
road for the city's Defenders it soon
became clear that no reinforcements
would be
coming on this realization whole
divisions of jyn soldiers particularly
of the semi-nomadic kitan people simply
switched sides and joined the
Mongols on the 1st of June
1215 the Mongols finally broke through
the
walls as a punishment for holding out so
long and for the Betrayal of the Jin
Emperor the Mongols sacked the city and
huge numbers of its people were put to
the
sword the writer Lee sinan describes the
destruction the Grandeur and beauty of
beijing's palaces were the crowning
achievement of ancient and modern times
when the tartar saw them they were so
stunned and frightened they did not dare
look up yet not long afterward the fires
set by their soldiers would burn for
over a
month what had once been the golden Jin
Empire now fractured into countless
feuding Warlords fighting over territory
some loyal to the Mongols others
defecting to the Sun Chinese in the
South and many others still simply out
for
themselves all Imperial Authority North
of the Yellow River
collapsed one Jin Dynasty poet a blind
man named jao Yuan wrote a poem about
this time that he called the song of
helplessness the Eastern barbarians
charge and raid the fields of the
western mountains God willing they will
Fester but how so I do not ever know as
I sip wine and watch the years Fleet by
I Stumble drunk a top the plateau and
sing the song of
helplessness with Beijing in Ruins
chingas Khan left one of his generals
behind in China to mop up the remnants
of the Gin but it would not be as easy
as he thought and the final conquest of
northern China would take many more
years in the South the Sun Chinese
watched the destruction with
delight their old enemies had been
utterly smashed and with the delightful
irony that it had come at the hands of
another Barbarian
people the writer jao gong describes
with Amusement how members of the former
Jinn government and royal family were
now reduced to the level of manual
laborers there are great men of the
vanquished gin who have gotten mixed up
in odd jobs falling as low as butchering
and pedling or leaving to become Bandits
all of them are still referred to by
their Old Government titles one family
has a number of men who push carts
around the towns and who still call
themselves Commissioner of transport
the destruction of the Mongol invasion
left its marks everywhere in the
landscape City walls had been torn down
in places crops had been destroyed since
the Mongols deliberately rode their
horses over the fields so that the land
could return to pastures for their
animals and the event sent
reverberations around the
world sometime afterwards a delegation
of diplomats traveled to China from the
region of Central Asia to investigate
what had
happened they arrived at the ruins of
Beijing and the scenes of Carnage that
they witnessed they later related to the
Persian scholar ju janii who recounts
them like something out of a
nightmare when we arrived near to the
seat of the government of the golden KH
from a considerable distance a high
white Mound appeared in sight we
supposed that that white Eminence was
perhaps a hill of snow and we made
inquiries of the guides and the people
of that part about it they replied the
whole of it is the bones of men
slain when we had proceeded onwards
another stage the ground had become so
greasy and dark from Human fat that it
was necessary for us to advance another
three stages on that same road road
until we came to dry ground again
through the infections arising from that
ground some of our party became ill and
some
perished when they reached the city
walls they found similar scenes of
Slaughter on reaching the Gate of the
city we perceived in a place under a
Bastion of the Citadel an immense
quantity of human bones
collected inquiry was made and people
replied that on the day the city was
captured 60,000 young girls threw
themselves from this Bastion of the
Fortress and destroyed themselves in
order that they might not fall captive
into the hands of the Mongol
forces and that all these were their
bones
The Scholar ju Jani was a fierce critic
of the Mongols and has been criticized
for his colorful exaggerations that
occur throughout his
writings he didn't witness these scenes
himself and may have exaggerated stories
told to him but either way it's clear
that the destruction of the Jinn Dynasty
left a terrible human toall
when summer ended chingis Khan rode back
across the GOI desert with all the gold
and assorted Riches of northern China
packed on the backs of his camels
leaving Untold suffering behind
him the Bounty of silk alone was so
great that Mongol soldiers ran out of
uses for it they began to use it as
packing material and rope to tie up
their h es and used silver jugs as water
troughs for their
animals precious metals slaves and other
treasure poured North back to Mongolia
in a river of gold that seemed never to
end the year was
1215 in the Chinese calendar the year of
the pig and the Mongol Empire was now
among the wealthiest on Earth
history has remembered chingis Khan as a
bloodthirsty conqueror a man hellbent on
subjugating the known world but in fact
most sources suggest that when he left
China Conquest was not the first thing
on his
mind in fact he seemed
satisfied he had made his people
wealthier than they had ever dreamed and
destroyed all nearby
Rivals he now controlled a vast sthe of
territory that covered almost the entire
length of the Mongolian step and the
Silk Road trade that flowed across it
the Persian scholar ATA Malik juven Eliz
this time of relative
peace in the latter part of his Reign he
had br brought about complete peace and
quiet and security and tranquility and
had achieved the extreme of prosperity
and well-being the roads were secure and
disturbances allayed so that whatever
profit or gain was displayed in the
uppermost West or the furthermost East
there Merchants would bend their
steps chingas Khan's Empire now
connected the wealthy production areas
of Sun China with the rich markets of
Persia Central Asia and the near East
and he wanted to make the most of this
profitable
route when it came to the settled
societies that bordered him he seems to
have treated his neighbors not as
enemies to be conquered but as potential
future
customers for years now he had been
exchanging diplomatic missions with his
neighbors to the West and in the year
1218 this culminated in the sending of a
great trade
delegation this was a caravan of
hundreds of boryan camels along with 450
Merchants led by an Indian man named
Jafar who were ordered to head into the
west and contact the wealthy Empires
that existed there in what is today Iran
Turkmenistan and usbekistan
with them they brought an enormous
wealth of goods to trade as Jani
recounts with perhaps some of his
characteristic
exaggeration among the Rarities and
presence that the chenas Khan sent was a
nugget of pure gold as big as a camel's
neck also he dispatched 500 camels Laden
with gold silver and silks beaver furs
Sable and elegant and ingenious things
of China and the desert regions
this trade delegation was a clear
statement of the new Empire's power and
wealth all of it looted from the coffers
of northern
China it's likely that a large portion
of the Mongol Elite had invested their
treasure in this Expedition and had bet
heavily on its success for this reason
chingis Khan's reputation among the
Mongol Lords was also at
stake during the cooler Autumn months
this trade Caravan traveled for several
weeks through Mongolia across the alai
mountains and over the grasslands and
deserts of what is today
Kazakhstan finally in November they
arrived at the border of what was then
the largest Muslim Kingdom in the world
the Empire of hzm
quism was a relatively new
power only a century earlier it had been
a small Kingdom centered on the powerful
city of Gan in the quarian
Oasis here the lands are watered by the
two great Rivers Saria and Amud Daria
which flow down from the tianhan
mountains of kyrgistan and the pamir
mountains north of the Hindu
Kush The Oasis cities along these two
rivers balk and bukar samakan and MV
were enticing stops after the long weeks
on the desert roads and for centuries
they had swelled with wealth from Silk
Road
trade with these riches they had
irrigated their arid lands until they
bloomed and fed vast and thriving
populations but over the proceeding
Century the turkic rulers of guran had
formed a fruitful partnership with the
nomadic people known as the kipchaks and
had recently used their powerful Cavalry
armies to expand into Turkmenistan and
Afghanistan and Spilled South into the
mountains of
Persia the kesian empire was now the
largest and wealthiest Muslim power on
the
planet the Persian scholar atam Malik
chuv
records the beauty of this
region horma to me is the best of lands
May its rain giving clouds never be
blown away it was the sight of the
Throne of The Sultans of the world its
Corner supported the shoulders of the
Great Men of the age its mansions were
resplendant with every kind of lofty
idea and its regions and districts were
so many rose gardens
such was the state of that
country the ruler of the new Empire of
quism was known as the hzm Sha and his
name was Allah Adin Muhammad he was a
warrior and a conqueror and proud of it
he had inherited a powerful Kingdom from
his father and over the last two decades
had expanded its borders even further
into a true Empire
Empire some in his court even flattered
him that he was the new Alexander that
Legends of his conquests would be told
for centuries to
come this flattery made him bold but
also rash and
impulsive this proud sha had agreed to
receive the Mongol trade delegation
along with chingis Khan's offer of
friendship as ju Jani recalls
the Changas Khan sent a great number of
offerings and said say unto theim sha I
Am The Sovereign of the sunrise and thou
The Sovereign of the sunset let there be
between us a firm Treaty of friendship
and peace and let Traders and Caravans
on both sides come and
go but when the merchants arrived in the
Borderlands of hzm they ran into to
trouble the first quare resian town they
arrived in was named
otra it sat in the middle of an oasis on
the S Daria River and as a crucial
Junction of several major roads it was a
quintessential Silk Road Trading town if
you walked its streets during this time
they would have been heaving with
Merchant traffic sounds of prayer from
the mosques vendors crying their Wars
and the sounds of camels noisily
watering after long days on the desert
roads but the governor of otra had a
fool Hardy nature his name was in aluk
and he was an uncle of thezam sha the
brother of the Sha's mother and this
gave him a great deal of
power the sha Allah Adin Muhammad had a
complicated relationship with his mother
and she had amassed a great deal of
influence at court some even whispered
that she was the real power behind the
throne and so her brother in aluk may
have believed he could do whatever he
pleased when he saw the Mongol Caravan
passing through his lands packed with
gold and fine silks in aluk hungered
after their cargo
some sources claim that he acted on the
orders of the Sha himself While others
say that he acted alone but we know that
when the Caravan passed through otra in
aluk accused the merchants of being
spies he ordered that they be arrested
immediately and their goods
seized in the struggle the merchants
were killed and their gold and silks and
other goods were taken to the great
Market town of buk kada where they were
sold and the governor in aluk of otra
took his
cut he had just become a great deal
richer he might have thought and what
were a bunch of Barbarian Horsemen 3,000
km away going to do about
it atalik juvani describes the magnitude
of this man's mistake
in executing his command he deprived
these men of their lives and possessions
nay rather he desolated and laid waste a
whole world for every drop of their
blood there would flow a whole river in
retribution for every hair on their
heads a 100,000 heads would roll in the
dust at every
Crossroad in exchange for every dinar a
thousand were exacted
far away in the Mongol heartlands on the
banks of the onon river a storm was
brewing in the court of the
khah chingis Khan was naturally offended
when he got word of the attack on his
Merchants but he assumed there must have
been some mistake
he sent an Envoy of three ambassadors to
seek an audience with the qum SHA and to
ask for his uncle in aluk to be handed
over for
punishment but thezam sha perhaps
feeling his mother breathing down his
neck refused the Khan's
demands and to make matters worse he
attempted what he must have hoped would
look like a show of
strength when the Han's ambassadors came
before him he had one of them killed on
the
spot then he rounded on the other
two he ordered that their beards be
shaved and that they be sent back to
Mongolia with their humiliation as an
answer to the
Khan when these ambassadors returned to
Mongolia with their faces Shor and the
Sha's words on their lips chingis Khan's
rage was seismic
[Music]
just as he had done before his invasion
of China he climbed to the top of the
Sacred Mountain Buran calun up through
the broken stones and Whispering Pine
Needles and there with the Mongolian
wind battering around him asked the god
of the Great Blue Sky what he should do
the secret history records what answer
he received
these Tidings had such an effect upon
the Khan's mind that the Whirlwind of
anger flared up with such a flame that
it could be quenched only by the
shedding of blood in this fever chingis
Khan went up alone to the summit of a
hill Beed his head turned his face
towards the Earth and for three days and
nights offered up prayer saying I was
not the author of this trouble grant me
strength to exact
Vengeance thereupon he descended from
the hill meditating action and making
Ready for
War in the year 1219 chingus Khan
gathered a vast force of
Warriors at perhaps as many as 200,000
men it may have been twice the size of
the force that had devastated Jinn China
along with his usual horde of nomadic
Horsemen he brought powerful new units
of Chinese Siege Engineers experts at
cracking open City walls with a variety
of ingenious engines and with that horde
he marched
West ahead of him was a journey of
thousands of kilometers over deserts and
mountains but steadily the Doom of the
quarian Empire Drew
[Music]
near juvani describes the sight that the
governor of otra saw arriving one day in
December in a thunderous cataclysm
outside his City
walls he bit the back of his hand in
amazement at the unexpected sight for he
perceived that the plane had become a
tossing sea of countless hosts and
Splendid troops while the air was full
of clamor and uproar and the nighing of
armored horses and the Roaring of male
clad Lions the air became blue the Earth
ebony the sea boiled with the noise of
the drums with his fingers he pointed to
the Army on the plane a host to which
there was no
end thezam sha had expected the arrival
of the Mongol forces but he had
dramatically miscalculated the kind of
response that chingis Khan would give
him he himself commanded a force of
perhaps 400,000 Men twice the size of
the Mongol armies and his cities were
among the most fortified in the world
he was sure that if he shut up his
armies in his great walled fortresses
the Mongols would soon run out of farms
to burn and sheep herders to Rob and
would eventually go
home but this would not turn out to be
the
case the moment the Mongols arrived
their Chinese Siege Engineers began to
build their
engines ot's defenses were formidable
but even these didn't hold out for long
the Persian scholar ju Jani a citizen of
theasian Empire who would flee to India
after the Mongol invasion writes about
what happened
next in a short time they took
otra they put both small and great young
and old to the sword and left not a soul
alive they marted the whole of them
the governor of atra in aluk was taken
alive to punish him for his greed in
seizing the Merchant's gold chingus Khan
ordered that he be executed with a cruy
fitting
punishment he had a great quantity of
silver melted down reaching temperatures
of nearly
1,000° and then poured the Searing
molten metal into the man's mouth ey
eyes and ears the city of otra was
destroyed and its people slaughtered its
remains a shattered sight rising from
the Arid Plains in ragged heaps of
Fallen
Stone but the Rage of the KH had only
just begun
[Music]
otra sat on the Saria river which formed
the northernmost border of the quisan
Empire several hundred kilom to the
South Another River the Amud Daria ran
almost parallel to it and on its banks
stood the wealthiest cities of the
region the booming Metropolis of
sarand and the scholarly religious heart
of
bukara the 10th Century Iranian author
istak who traveled in the region
provides a vivid description of its
pleasant
landscape I know no place in it or in
sand itself where if one ascends some
elevated ground one does not see
Greenery and a pleasant
place the land extends 8 Days travel
through unbroken Greenery and Gardens
along both sides of the river and Beyond
these fields is pasture for
flocks every town and settlement has a
fortress it is the most fruitful of all
the countries of Allah in it are the the
best trees and fruits in every home are
Gardens systens and flowing
water it was on these cities that
chingas Khan Now set his
sights but reaching these wealthy cities
would be no easy feat between the Mongol
armies and the walls of samand and bukar
lay more than 500 km of sandy desert
known as the kizel Kum a name which
means Red Sands in turkic
languages this desert was baking hot and
even trade Caravans would skirt around
its edges rather than risk death in the
wastes the citizens of bukar and samand
had heard about the arrival of the
Mongols in the north but they were not
particularly worried tribal Nomads had
raided along the northern riverlands
before but no large army could cross the
kizel Kum
desert but they had severely
underestimated the
Mongols chingis Khan left his two middle
sons chagatai and ogad to finish up the
siege of otra with his eldest son Joi
taking an army north towards the ARL sea
meanwhile he sent two small armies
Southward into the ferana valley with
instructions to hunt down and kill the
Sha
Muhammad but chingis Khan himself
accompanied by his youngest son tooi was
determined to do what others had
considered impossible to cross the kelum
desert with 30,000 horses and strike
right at the heart of the Empire the
religious Center of
bukara the crossing would have been hard
chingis Khan employed local men who knew
the hidden paths through the wastes and
the best time of year to make the
journey in the colder winter months Dew
would sometimes form on the ground in
certain places and small plants could
grow with this help the Army
successfully made the crossing and
arrived lived on the other side on the
7th of February
1220 atam Malik juvani describes the
site that the citizens of bukara saw
outside their City
walls in the morning jingus Khan arrived
unexpectedly before the town when the
inhabitants unaware beheld the
surrounding Countryside choked with
Horsemen and the air black as night with
a dust of Cavalry fright and panic
overcame them and fear and dread
prevailed his troops were more numerous
than ants or locusts being in their
multitude Beyond estimation or
computation Detachment after Detachment
arrived each like a billowing sea and
encamped round about the
town at the sight of this Force the
20,000 or so soldiers stationed at
bukara lost all hope of defending their
City when night fell they attempted to
flee under cover of
Darkness but the Mongols spotted them
and simply chased them down on the
Plains by the Light of the Moon the
Mongol Horsemen hunted and killed every
single solder as though chasing deer on
the step the city of bukar surrendered
Ed within 3 days and opened its gates
with only a determined core of soldiers
HED up in its inner
Citadel intriguingly it's in this moment
that we have the only purported instance
of chingis Khan ever setting foot inside
a city usually when it became clear that
a settlement was about to fall to his
soldiers the KH would leave one of his
generals to loot the place while while
he would return to his camp and his felt
walled tent his job done it's clear he
had a powerful distaste for cities and
for anyone who would voluntarily
imprison themselves within their walls
and foul smelling
streets but when bukar opened its Great
Gate the Persian sources describe him
riding into its
streets bukar was one of the religious
centers of the Muslim world at the time
and its reputation was known far and
wide but the KH likely hated what he saw
we can imagine him wrinkling his nose at
the pungent Aromas of the medieval city
the rats scuttling through the sewers
and fish markets and tanneries the
clouds of flies circling over rotting
miden heaps and dung Hills all of it so
different to the Fresh open grasslands
that he knew and
loved he went straight to the largest
and grandest building the great Mosque
of the city which was famed across the
Muslim world for its size and
opulence this he assumed must be the
house of the king as atam Malik juvani
recounts jingus Khan asked those present
whether this was the place of the sultan
they replied that it was the house of
God then he too got down from the horse
and mounting two or three steps of the
pulpit he exclaimed the countryside is
empty of food fill our horses bellies
and the Mongols brought the cases in
which the Kuran were kept out into the
courtyard of the mosque where they cast
the Kuran right and left and turned the
cases into mangers for their horses
[Music]
then chingis Khan gathered the common
people of the city in the great Mosk of
bukar with the pages of the qurans still
littering the
floor the people must have been
terrified shaking with fear praying and
weeping softly then over their heads the
great Khan's voice rang
out he mounted the pulpit in the
festival prayer space and said oh people
know that you are great Sinners and your
leaders are at the head of the pack in
sin you ask me why I say this I say it
because I am the scourge of God if great
sins had not been committed by you the
great God would not have sent you one
like me as a
torment we don't know if this event
truly took place as juvani
describes he was not old enough to
witness it himself but may have heard it
secondhand or perhaps this episode was
an invention of the writer designed to
make sense of what happened and explain
the destruction of the Mongol invasion
in terms that his Muslim readers could
understand as a judgment of God but
either way we know what happened next
the C cens of bukar were rounded up and
driven towards the Citadel where the
Sha's forces were still
resisting just as in China the citizens
were forced to dismantle their own
City's defenses and their bodies piled
up below the
walls against this Onslaught The Citadel
of bukara didn't last
long chingis Khan now wielded an army
that combined the strength and mobility
of the the step warrior with the
technological Ingenuity of the Chinese
the combination was terrifying as juvani
describes on the outside catapults were
erected bows bent and stones and arrows
discharged and on the inside ballistas
and pots of Napa were set in motion it
was like a red hot furnace fed from
without by hard stick
while from the belly of the Furnace
Sparks shoot into the air for days they
fought in this
manner when the Citadel finally fell
chingis Khan ordered the city walls to
be demolished utterly and all the
soldiers inside were
slaughtered but in return for their
Speedy surrender the citizens of the
wider city were spared juvani recalls
the simple proposition he offered to the
quisan
people let the Amir and great ones and
the numerous common people know this
that all the face of the Earth from the
going up of the sun to his going down I
have given unto the
KH whosoever shall submit Mercy shall be
shown to him and to his wives and
children and household
but whosoever shall not submit Shall
Perish together with all his wives and
children and
Kinsmen this strategy of calculated
leniency and brutality was ruthlessly
effective but it could only work if word
got
around for this reason chingis Khan
would always allow refugees to flood
into other cities around the region
filling people's heads with stories of
the vast destruction visited on all who
opposed the KH and his Mercy to those
who bent the knee the Arab writer iban
Al air living in mosul at the time
recounts the effect of these
increasingly outlandish
rumors these tartars may God confound
them came from the East and ru Deeds
which horrify all who hear of them
stories have been related to me which
the hearer can scarcely credit as to the
terror of the tartars which God Almighty
cast into men's
heart this was one of the most effective
propaganda campaigns in history and the
strategy paid
off with the siege of bukar completed
chingis Khan now swung around and bore
down on the wealthy Metropolis of
samand samand was not just a booming
trade Hub it was also A Mighty Fortress
and considered by many to be
impregnable it was defended by a large
army even including 20 war elephants
brought from India but at the sight of
the Mongol Force approaching and with
refugees in its streets spreading Tales
of Terror the Army tasked with guarding
its walls simply threw down their Spears
and
surrendered at the time of prayer they
opened the gate and closed the door of
resistance the Mongols then entered and
that day busied themselves with the
destruction of the town and its defenses
the inhabitants Drew their feet beneath
the skirt of security and the Mongols in
no way molested them
the fall of sarand provided uncountable
amounts of Loot and the Mongols now
found themselves the new owners of some
exotic
Novelties the 20 Indian war elephants
that the Sha had used in his
army but chingis Khan had little use for
these
beasts the elephant handlers brought
their elephants to jinger's car and
demanded elephant food he asked them
what the elephants had lived on before
they fell into
captivity they replied the grass of the
Plains when he heard this he ordered the
elephants be set free to forage for
themselves they were accordingly
released and in the end perished of
hunger in return for surrendering the
citizens of samand were spared a
massacre but in other places that
surrendered the Mongols restraint was
misinterpreted as weakness this was when
things could get
ugly one such example was the quarian
city of
nishapur nishapur was the largest
metropolitan City on the Silk Road a
vast and Wealthy place in what is today
Northeastern
Iran it sat in a fertile plane at the
foot of the binalud mountain range in a
region known as
corasan juvan describes its
beauty if the Earth may be compared to
the heavens then the lands are like its
stars and nishapur among these stars is
like the fair Venus of the Skies what
are men doing in Baghdad and kufa seeing
that nishapur is upon the Earth for if
there be a paradise on the face of the
Earth it is this and if it is not a
paradise then there is no Paradise at
all the Mongols arrived at nishapur in
1221 ad and at first the city took the
Khan's deal it opened its Gates and its
treasuries to the Mongols
but then the Mongol Army departed with
their riches and left behind only a
handful of Governors to keep their hold
on the
city the citizens of nishapur took this
withdrawal as a sign that the Mongols
didn't intend to hold it they soon
revolted killed the small number of
Mongol Governors and locked their
Gates when they got word of this the
Khan's armies swung back around and laid
eged the
city still its fate was not entirely
sealed that was until a single Arrow
flew down from the city walls and struck
one of the Mongol attackers killing him
unfortunately for the people of nishapur
he was the husband of one of chingis
Khan's daughters the great Khan's
son-in-law a man named tachar
until the third day they fought fiercely
from the Tower of karakus and discharged
quarls and arrows from the walls and
ramparts by an evil chance which was to
be the bane of all that people an arrow
was let fly whereby doar fell lifeless
the townsmen having made an end of him
without recognizing his person
the death of a member of the Mongol
Royal bloodline was something that
chingis Khan took extremely
seriously when the city finally fell he
called upon his widowed daughter and
told her that she would be allowed to
decide the fate of
nishapur in her grief and rage she
ordered that the city be utterly
destroyed and every living thing within
its walls put to death
they then drove all the survivors men
and women out onto the plane and in
order to avenge TOA it was commanded
that the town should be laid waste in
such a manner that the site could be
plowed upon and that in the exaction of
Vengeance not even cats and dogs would
be Left Alive
the destruction of the city was total
and the Vengeance of the khah
remorseless in its
totality they severed the heads of the
slain from their bodies and heaped them
up in piles keeping those of the men
separate from those of the women and
children abodes and Dwelling Places were
leveled with the dust rose gardens
became furnaces
after the fall of the Empire's most
powerful Fortress of sarand theasian sha
truly began to
panic as his cities fell One By One The
sha Allah Adin Muhammad turned taale and
fled he rode from Fortress to Fortress
as the Mongol armies pursued him and as
he did he slipped into a deep
depression juvani recounts that he began
to be plagued with nightmares he began
drinking heavily and spent all his time
in the pursuit of
Pleasures the terror of the last day was
apparent in his condition and fear and
dread were manifest in his speech for
the remainder of his life he constantly
applied himself to the quaffing of cups
of purple wine one One Night in his
sleep the sultan saw luminous persons
their faces scratched their hair
disordered and disheveled clad in Black
robes like mourners who smoked their
heads and made
lamentation he asked them who they were
and they replied we are
Islam eventually with his nightmares and
the Mongol Horsemen chasing close behind
him the Sha escaped to the most remote
Hideout he could manage he took a boat
out onto a small island off the coast of
the Caspian Sea and hid
there whenever he halted for a day the
Mongols would overtake him the sultan
sent for certain Amir and consulted them
they thought it best for him to seek
asylum in one of the islands of the sea
of abason he went to one of these
islands where he remained for a while
then when the report of his presence on
the island was spread about he took the
precaution of removing to another
Island finally the Mongols captured the
Sha's capital of Gan and his family fell
into the hands of chingis
Khan when the Dreadful F news reached
the sultan and he leared that his small
Sons had been put to the sword that his
veiled woman folk had been in the
clutches of strangers and that all of
his wedded wives had fallen into the
Embraces of other men his head grew
dizzy the world grew dark before his
eyes then was the pain past remedy and
threatened his very existence and he
preferred death to life he wried in this
anguish and agitation and bemon This
calamity and disaster until he delivered
up his soul to God and was released from
the sorrow of his life and the trickery
of the revolving
Heavens alone on his tiny Island the Sha
of theasian Empire Allah Adin Muhammad
died possibly of dentry in the year
1220 he was buried wrapped in a torn
white shirt for a
shroud his Empire now utterly destroyed
passed into the hands of the
Mongols his eldest son an accomplished
Warrior named Jalal Adin evaded capture
and led a sizable Force South in the
direction of India where he intended to
continue his resistance but he was
finally caught by the pursuing Mongol
force in the Autumn of
1221 and his army was utterly
destroyed Legend has it that Jalal Adin
only escaped death by leaping his horse
into the Indus River and swimming for
safety across the rushing torrent of its
Waters the geographer yakut Al hamawi a
citizen of the city of MV who fled the
advance of the Mongols wrote about the
destruction they left in their
wake those infidels and heathens roed
through those abodes so that palaces
were erased off the Earth as lines of
writing are effaced from paper and
cities became a dwelling for The Owl and
the Raven in those places the screech
owls answer each
other they are filled with sadness the
Devil Himself would bewail the great
catastrophe it was an event enough to
turn gray the hair of
children the Arab writer iban Al a also
wrote with palpable sorrow about the
horror of those
days with one stroke a world which
billowed with fertility was laid
desolate and the regions thereof became
a desert and the greater part of the
Living Dead and their skin and bones
crumbling dust and the mighty were
humbled for some years I continued a
verse from mentioning this event deeming
it so horrible that I shrank from
recording it oh would that my mother had
not borne me or that I had died and
become a forgotten thing before this
bethle n
it is unlikely that mankind will see the
like of This calamity until the world
comes to an end and
perishes the conquest of the quarian
Empire had taken four years it had wiped
some of the world's largest cities off
the map and cost countless lives Wes and
by the end of it chingis Khan's Empire
was the largest that the world had ever
seen by this time chingis Khan was in
his 60s and he was beginning to think
with increasing trepidation about his
own mortality
during his campaign in Persia he invited
a Chinese Dost monk named Master Chang
Chun to visit him in the hopes that this
wise man might have some answer about
how a man could live
forever this holy man's journey is
recorded in a text called the account of
the perfect Master Chang chun's Journey
to the
West in it he describes his journey over
the Mongolian
step on the fifth day of the third month
we began traveling in a northeasterly
Direction all around us we saw human
habitation nothing but black carts and
white tents and herders following the
grass and water to posture their animals
when we passed out of the marshy Plains
there was not even the smallest tree or
shrine
only yellow dust clouds and white
grasses were in
sight on his journey he saw everywhere
the signs of the Great War that was
unfolding and passed by a number of
battlefields left by the passage of the
Mongol armies into the
West the Stony gorge on the south was
unbearably alarming on both sides
precipice PES held up the toing sky and
the chilly surge of a mountain stream
flowed and rolled over the ground people
covered their noses because of corpses
strewn about the Narrow Path but it was
the long-eared donkeys drowned in the
Stream that sickened my heart War has
raged for 10 years and over huge
distances when he finally arrived in
samakan after months of travel he found
the city half empty many of its
inhabitants fled and its walls and
defenses torn
down in the second month of winter on
the 18th day we crossed a large river
and reached north of the city of suant
before the sultan Was Defeated there
were more than 100,000 households in the
city since the fall of the city Only One
in four
remains finally he reached the court of
the great
Khan when he arrived chingis Khan had
one question on his mind refreshments
and drinks were served and then the
emperor asked now that you have come all
this way what secret Elixir for long
life can you provide me but the DST
Master would disappoint
him the master replied there is the way
of good health but I can give you no
Elixir for long
life his majesty appreciated the
Master's cander and ordered two tents to
be erected to the east of his residence
in which we would
stay it's clear from this that chingis
Khan was beginning to fear that he did
not have long
left a hunting accident also seems to
have frightened him and brought the
question of his mortality to the
Forefront of his
mind on the Eighth Day the emperor went
hunting in the foothills of the eastern
mountains and shot at a large boar his
horse tripped and he lost control the
boar stood nearby not daring to advance
until his Entourage rushed in with
another horse the hunt was called off
and the emperor returned when the master
heard about the incident he went to
remonstrate with the emperor saying your
falling from your horse is a warning
from Heaven the emperor responded saying
I have already come to this deep
realization for 2 months thereafter he
did not go out to
hunt the man who had brought brought so
Much Death to other lands now felt its
icy hand on his own
[Music]
shoulder chingis Khan's concern wasn't
just for his own life but now in his 6
he began to realize too late that he had
not sufficiently prepared for the
inevitable question of his
succession he would pass on to his heirs
the largest land Empire that history
would ever know but when he looked at
his four Sons by his chief Empress
borter he found them totally unprepared
to take on such a
burden it's likely that his plan was a
simple one his Empire would be divided
into a kaleidoscope of different
provinces and over these three of his
sons would rule but he would ensure that
each held possessions in the others
lands so that none would be tempted to
go to
war above these three brothers would sit
the fourth son who would rule the entire
Empire in his place as the great Khan
the system was well conceived but it
would depend on the cooperation of every
one of his sons and for a number of
reasons that is the one thing that
chingis Khan did not
have he had brought his four Sons Joi
chagatai oade and tooi with him on the
quesan campaign and they had each LED
armies and fought bravely
but throughout the war trouble had been
brewing just as he and his half brother
bega had once quarreled over fish and
rabbits now his sons fought over cities
and
kingdoms first let's take a look at the
character of each of his sons
the eldest of chingis Khan's sons was
Chi but his life had been lived under a
cloud of
Suspicion he was the son whose name
meant guest as though he was simply a
visitor who was being shown courtesy by
the rest of the
family he had been born shortly after
chingis Han's wife bter was kidnapped by
the merket forest people and no one
could know for sure whether chingis Khan
was truly his
father still the Khan had all his life
treated Joi as one of his sons and Joi
also had the strongest desire to prove
himself he was a courageous leader who
always charged right into the heart of
the
fight whatever the truth of his
fatherhood he had spent his life living
up to the reputation of his
father but while chingis Khan seems to
have set the issue of his Parenthood
aside his other Sons couldn't forget it
so
readily next in line was chingis Khan's
second son
chagatai chagatai was hot-headed and
proud and all his life had resented his
older brother
Joi when when chingis Khan looked at Joi
and chagatai it's hard to imagine that
he didn't see the similarity between
himself and his older brother bega and
remember perhaps now with a little
sadness how that story had ended with
bega lying dead in the long grass of the
step all his life chagatai had felt sure
that Joi was not his father's son and he
treated his older brother with
contempt silently he feared that the
Throne of the great Khan would be given
to his older brother in his eyes a
usurper and the son of the merket who
raped his
mother in Hope of mending the
relationship between these two brothers
chingis Khan had given them a joint
mission in the last war to capture
thezam Sha's capital of
Gan but the plan had been a
disaster The Defenders of the city put
up a fearsome resistance that lasted 6
months and the brothers were forced to
burn it down in order to push them back
since the city would belong to Joi once
it was captured chagatai cared little
about how much damage was done to it
whereas Joi wished to protect its
buildings even at the cost of Mongol
lives chingis Khan had hoped to capture
the jewel of this Empire intact but now
Gan was a ruin and the city would never
regain its former
Splendor this episode seems to have been
just another point of bitter contention
between the two brothers and a warning
about the burning resentments smoldering
between
them the third brother was named
orade he was charismatic and Larger than
Life a barrel chested man with an
unusually large beard for a
Mongol he had a jovial personality and a
love of feasting and
drinking he was a capable General but he
did have one overriding weakness that
was his raging
alcoholism like many Mongols orade was a
big drinker but even by Mongol standards
his habit went too
far at one point his older brother
chagatai had appointed an official to
monitor OG's drinking but it was no good
oade evaded his Watcher and drank
himself silly
regardless one common story about him
describes how he promised his brothers
that he would half the number of Cups he
drank every night but he simply ordered
a new cup to be made that was twice the
size and so his drinking went
on still OG was diplomatic and generous
and as a result was well liked by
all the final brother was
tooi he was the youngest of the four a
calculating and formidable Warrior and
he had a famed streak of
Cruelty during the conquest of the
quarian Empire he had been sent to
pacify the region of corasan and passed
through the region dealing out death on
a scale that was unusual even for
Mongols he had been leading the Army
responsible for the massacre at
nishapur and he repeated the same
genocidal violence at the great cities
of MV and
herat at these settlements he promised
the inhabitants that he would spare them
if they
surrendered but unlike his father he
went back on his word when they opened
the gates he ordered that every living
person be put to the
sword interestingly Mongol tradition
often held that the youngest son should
inherit his father's property as a kind
of social
welfare it was assumed that by the time
their father died the older brothers
would have already amassed their own
wealth whereas the youngest had the most
need of an
inheritance this rule had never been
applied to titles which were supposed to
be appointed to the most worthy
candidate but it must have been playing
on everyone's Minds as the question of
the Khan's succession became ever more
pressing
it was these four sons that chingis Khan
summoned to a fateful crural Thai a
meeting of the clans in
1223 at a region called kulan Bashi In
modern Kazakhstan Joi the man of
Uncertain fatherhood chagatai the
hot-headed and embittered wouldbe older
brother orade the stocky wine soaked
Drinker and tooy the coldhearted Warrior
and in the Smoke Filled atmosphere of
his great tent he told them that there
they would decide who would rule the
Empire after he was
gone the secret history records that one
of his wives yesui urged him to choose
his successor in the following words
living beings who are born to this world
are not Eternal when your body like a
great old tree will fall down to whom
will you give your people which is like
Tangled
hemp when your body like the stone base
of a pillar will
collapse to whom will you bequeath your
people which is like a flock of
birds of your four Sons the heroes whom
you have begotten which one will you
designate as your
successor but the kural Tha got off to a
bad start first chingis Khan asked his
oldest son Joi to speak and this sign of
apparent favor enraged his hot-headed
younger brother
chagatai he said the eldest of my sons
is Joi what do you Joi say speak up but
before Joi could utter a sound jagatai
said do you mean that you will appoint
Joi as your
successor how can we let ourselves be
ruled by this bastard son of
Amer the effect of this pronouncement
was
explosive at these words Joi Rose and
grabbing chagai by the collar said
I have never been told by my father the
Khan that I was different from my
brothers how can you discriminate
against me in what skill are you better
than I only in your pigheadedness could
you possibly exceed
me chingis Han watched his son's
fighting in
silence seeing the Flames of the heire
dance in their eyes perhaps he
remembered the words of his mother o
alun on the day that he and kasar had
killed their brother bega suddenly his
great voice boomed out trembling with
anger before you were born The Starry
Sky was turning upon
itself the many people of the felt tents
were in
turmoil they fought against each other
at such time your mother was abducted it
was not her wish it happened at a time
when one man slew another she was not in
love with someone else you speak so as
to harden the butter of your mother's
affection so as to sour the milk of that
lady's heart were you too not born from
the same belly were you too not issued
from a single
womb the these were almost the same
words that his mother o alun had once
used on him the same words that the
legendary Alan the beautiful had said to
her quarreling sons the brothers were
chastened and perhaps realizing that
they had harmed both of their own
chances chagai suggested another
candidate that everyone could agree
on I shall not dispute joi's strength
nor shall I reply to his claims of skill
but it is ogay Among Us who is steady
and reliable let us therefore agree on
OG day so he spoke and at these words
chingas Khan said what do you say Joi
speak up whereupon Joi said chagai has
just said it chagatai and I shall in
cooperation with each other serve the KH
let us agree on o
day from this moment on the drunken but
charismatic orade day would be the heir
to the Mongol
Empire after that explosive meeting the
brothers rode off in all directions
never to be
reunited the oldest son Joi was most
wounded Ed by chingis Khan's decision
and would never see his father
again wearied by this conflict in his
family the great Khan set out back to
Mongolia arriving there in Spring of
1225 perhaps those who saw him there
felt a change come over him the life of
the great KH was coming to an end
[Music]
in the year
1225 chingis Khan set out on what would
be his final military
campaign it would be against the tanguts
of Western Ria the Tibetan Buddhists he
had already conquered on his way to
Northern
China in the years since they had become
unreliable Al I and were beginning to
rebel against his rule with the kesian
Empire conquered he now wanted to punish
the tanguts for their
impudence he marched into their lands
and laid waste to them but on this
campaign while traveling through the hot
deserts of the western regions chingis
Han fell from his horse as the secret
history
records
foras Khan riding his Steed named red
Earth gray on the way hunted the many
wild asses of
aruka when the wild asses passed close
by them his horse took fright chingis
Khan fell and his body being in great
pain he halted at
troat he spent that night there
and the following morning his wife yui
katun said princes and commanders
consult each other on what to do the KH
has spent the night his body hot with
fever the summer heat made the khn's
condition worse and so his men took him
up into the nearby mountains of lupan
densely forested with Chinese Pine and
dragon Spruce just beginning to turn to
their autumn
colors not long after the great Khan's
illness worsened and he died at the end
of August in the year
1227 the secret history of the Mongols
records his passing in brief terms
[Music]
jingus KH came back and in the year of
the pig ascended to
[Music]
Heaven There is much debate over what
exactly killed chingis
Khan there are several outlandish myths
that circulate around the circumstances
of his death some more colorful versions
fill his passing with dramatic irony
imagining a tangut princess killing and
castrating him when he tries to force
her into bed but most Chronicles simply
mention an illness that fell on him
suddenly among them the Persian
historian atam Malik
juvani when chenas Khan returned from
the lands of the West to his old
incumbent in the East he was overcome by
an incurable disease arising from the
unpleasantness of the
climate some Modern Scholars have even
suggested that he was an early casualty
of the Bubonic plague which would soon
spread westwards across Eurasia and
cause death and destruction on an
unprecedented
scale the Chinese language Source the
history of Yuan or Yuan shei records
that on the 18th of August the Khan felt
unwell with a fever
and 8 days later he died such a rapid
pace of decline could point to the Black
Death being the
cause whatever the cause of his death
the K's body was soon prepared for
burial Mongols of this time held a great
taboo around speaking about death and so
we actually know little about the deaths
of many of the characters in this story
some like chingis Khan's wife B simply
disappear from records altogether and we
have no information about when or how
she
died as for the Khan some belied that he
was probably buried close to where his
army was situated somewhere in ninga
among the lupan
mountains but other sources record a
more dramatic version of events the
Venetian explorer Marco Polo who
traveled to Mongolia nearly half a
century later wrote The Following
account that was told to
him all the grand KH and all the
descendants of chingus their first Lord
are carried to a mountain to be interred
wherever so The Sovereign may die he is
carried to his burial in that mountain
with his predecessors no matter if the
place of his death were a hundred Day's
Journey distant there must he be carried
to his
burial Mongol religious beliefs held
that the bodies of the Dead should never
be
disturbed for this reason Marco Polo
also recounts that the Mongols were
determined that no one should ever find
the grave of the great KH that his body
would forever lie
undisturbed and that they went to to
extraordinary lengths to make sure its
location remained a
secret when they are carrying the body
of any Emperor to be buried with the
others the Convoy that goes with the
body puts to the sword all whom they
fall in with on the road they do the
same too with horses for when the
emperor dies they kill all his best
horses in order that he may have the use
of them in the other world as they
believe and I tell you was a certain
truth that when one Khan died more than
20,000 persons who chanced to meet the
body on its way were slain in the manner
I have
told while these accounts may be an
exaggeration what is sure is that the
Mongol soldiers fenced off a large area
of land around the sacred Mountain
burhan khaldun marking it with a fence
of arrows stuck in the
ground other than the closest royal
family of the KH no one was allowed to
enter this forbidden zone on pain of
death with guards permanently stationed
on its perimeter the later Mongol
historian sagang seten describes the
body of chingis Khan being removed to
his native Mongolia on a two- wielded
wagon escorted by his great Army on the
way one of the khn's old friends began
to sing a mournful
song Koken bahador of the sunnid tribe
lifted up his voice and
sang Once you did swoop like a falcon
but now a rumbling wagon trundles you
off oh my king have you in truth and
forsaken your wife and your children and
the rule of your people oh my king
circling in Pride Like an Eagle once you
did lead us oh my king but now you have
stumbled and Fallen like a wild horse oh
my
king today it's thought that the most
likely place for the Khan's burial is in
this area somewhere around the mountain
of Buran khaldun the holy Peak that he
had always climbed whenever he needed to
hear the voice of his God and to be
close to the great sky
above now between chingis Khan and the
Great Blue Sky there was only silence
[Music]
after the death of chingis Khan the
Mongol Empire went into a state of some
Shock and its Wars of Conquest were
largely put on hold but the immense
respect he had won during his life
carried over into his death and the plan
he had put in place for his succession
was carried out
for the next two years the empire was
held in a kind of Regency by his
youngest son tooi and at the end of that
period once the time of mour had passed
orade took his position as great Khan on
the 13th of September
1229 as the secret history
records in accordance with the decree of
chingis Khan they installed aodai as
Khan the night guards the quiver bearers
and the 8,000 deards who had been
protecting the precious life of their
father chingis Khan the personal slaves
and the 10,000 guards who had been in
close attendance on the person of his
father the Khan were all handed
over in fitting with with his character
one of OG's first acts as Khan was to
hold a grand
celebration at this Festival feasts were
held songs were sung and games played
wrestling and hunting archery and riding
and of course enormous quantities of
alcohol would have been
consumed the Iraq and black kumis the
Chinese rice wines and fine Persian
grape wines would have flowed from
Silver goblets and the rry would have
lasted for
days orade day loved to be liked and he
had always had a generous streak to
celebrate his coming to power he opened
his father's treasuries and distributed
gifts and wealth to all the influential
families of the Mongol step this gener
generosity gained him many friends but
the Persian scholar atam Malik juvani
recounts his proplate behavior with a
note of
disapproval he was ever spreading the
carpet of merrymaking and treading the
path of excess in constant application
to wine and the company of angelic women
being by Nature extravagantly Bountiful
he gave away everything that came in
from the father and nearest parts of the
Empire without its being registered by
accountant or
inspector no mortal returned from his
presence without his lot or share and no
petitioner heard from his tongue the
word
no W day was for the most part a
successful ruler but he also had a quite
different vision for the Mongol Empire
to that of his father chingas Khan had
always maintained his dislike and
distrust of settled peoples and City
dwellers he had envisioned his Empire as
the people of the felt walls a pure
Confederation of nomadic peoples that
would stand up for the pastoralist
lifestyle against the Corruptions of the
settled
world but OG had seen the great Cities
of China and Persia he had looked with
envious eyes upon the Great Walls of
Beijing and samand and had brought
advisers from northern China to help him
rule one of these a kitan man named
yellu chukai is said to have given OG
the following piece of
advice an Empire one on
Horseback cannot be ruled on horseback
for this reason orade now dreamed of
departing from his father's policy and
building a proper capital for the Empire
he had
inherited this Capital would be complete
with all the things a great City needed
buildings streets temples workshops and
palaces he ordered that this new city be
built out in the middle of the Step at
the same spot where his father had set
up his main Camp a site where the Canyon
likee oron River Valley spills out into
the pastures below right in the heart of
Mongolia construction of this city
happened quickly with Architects and
Craftsmen being brought primarily from
the conquered regions of
China but OG also brought some Persian
Builders to Mongolia to work on his
palaces atalik juvani gives an account
of the new Mong
City there had previously been no town
or Village in that place except for the
remains of a wall the KH caused a town
to be built on it which they called Ordu
balik though it is better known as K
koram karakorum in Mongolian means black
Castle or black
Stones the city rose out of the bare
step grasslands with earthwork walls and
four Gates and buildings lined with
wooden pillars built in the Chinese
style with swooping Pagoda
roofs at the Four Corners of the city he
had four stone tortoises carved facing
out in each
Direction the tortoise was a symbol of
stability and protection
and with their incredibly long lives had
become representations of
Eternity these Stone Guardians watched
over the city and formed a statement in
stone that karakorum was built to
last with the help of his foreign
Craftsman orade built karakorum into
what he hoped would be a fitting capital
for the world's largest Empire and A
fitting venue for the world's most
impressive
parties above the town a garden was
built for the KH with four Gates and in
the midst of that Garden Artisans reared
upper castle and inside it a throne
having three flights of steps for the KH
alone the utensils were of gold and
silver and studded with jewels twice in
the year would the the KH a light in
this Pleasant Abode whenever the sun
entered the sign of Aries and the world
was glad he would Feast for a month in
this residence and as the Bounty of the
rain reaches both herbs and trees so
both great and small took part in the
feasting vade encouraged the Empire's
Elites to build houses near his Palace
but but for the most part karakorum
remained something of a halfway point
between a Mongol camp and a true
City much of the Mongol nobility
continued to live in their gear tents
often pitching them outside the walls
and treated the city as something of an
eccentric
novelty at its heart was the central
Secretariat the main civilian governing
body of the
Empire this contained a large large body
of scribes who assessed tax Registries
and tribute and translated orders to be
sent to the various provinces of the
Empire other than this administrative
Hub and the Palaces of the KH the city
contained mostly warehouses for the vast
Treasures looted from all over Asia and
workshops where captured Craftsmen
toiled as well as various houses of
worship for all the different religions
of the
Empire the Flemish monk William of rubbr
who passed through in the middle of the
13th century was less than impressed
with this imperial capital and compared
it unfavorably to the small town of sand
Deni just north of
Paris regarding the city of carac Corum
you should know that discounting the
Khan's Palace it is not even as fine as
the town of sand Deni and the monastery
of sand Deni is worth 10 of the palace
it contains two quarters one for the
sarens where there are bazars and where
many Traders gather the other is the
quarter of the Chinese who are all
Craftsmen set apart from these quarters
lie large palaces belonging to the court
secretaries there are 12 Idol temples
belonging to different peoples two
mosques where the religion of Muhammad
is proclaimed and one Christian Church
at the far end of the town the town is
enclosed by a mud wall and has four
Gates but despite its somewhat humble
appearance karakorum was an expensive
city to
maintain sitting out in the middle of
the step its land was not fertile
and its people could grow few crops for
this reason it was never self-sufficient
and its population had to be sustained
by food brought over long distances from
crop growing regions in northern
China orade had hoped that karakorum
would become a trading Hub in its own
right and that its economy would become
self-
sustaining to encourage this he had
trees planted along the roads that were
used by trade Caravans to help shelter
them from the Sun and rain and to show
where the roads were when the step was
covered in Winter
snows or day also expanded one of the
Mongols most impressive achievements
their extensive postal
system this system which became known as
the jam in Mongolian and yam in Turk
connected every corner of the Empire
with a system of postal stations where
Fresh Horses and supplies were always
kept the Venetian explorer Marco Polo
describes the remarkable functioning of
this enormous piece of public
infrastructure from each City prede many
roads and highways leading to a variety
of provinces one to one Province another
to another and each each Road receives
the name of the province to which it
leads the messengers of the emperor find
at every 25 miles of the journey a
station which they call Yam in which
they find all the rooms furnished with
fine beds and all other necessary
articles in Rich silk if even a king
were to arrive at one of these he would
find himself well
launched at each of these stations
a full compliment of Fresh Horses would
be kept when a messenger approached one
of these stations he would Bang a Drum
so that the people working there would
know to get his horse ready and he could
continue his journey with the minimum
amount of
delay at some of these stations moreover
there shall be posted some 400 horses
standing ready for the use of The
Messengers at others there shall be two
200 on all these posts taken together
there are more than 300,000 horses kept
up espcially for the use of The
Messengers The thing is on a scale so
wonderful and costly that it is hard to
bring oneself to describe
it the Mongols issued passports to
Travelers in the form of tablets called
pisar made of wood bronze silver or gold
depending on the rank of the person
carrying
it these conferred status on the
traveler and allowed them to access the
services of the jam postal
stations but despite these measures to
bring the vast Empire closer together
the capital of karakorum was some way
off the main arteries of the Silk Road
and Traders saw little reason to make
the long journey out into the step
unless it could be made worth their
while to encourage them to keep coming
to his new city orade day decreed that
they would be paid above the usual price
for their goods sometimes even twice as
much as they were worth
Elsewhere for a time this strategy
worked and the merchants kept coming but
this system was obviously
unsustainable and soon the money began
to run dry
by the year
1235 6 years into orad's rule much of
the vast wealth that had been amassed by
chingis Khan had already been frittered
away by his
son the dream of turning the nomadic
Empire of Conquest into a settled Empire
of trade and commerce was looking ever
more unlikely and facing a potential
bankruptcy in his future orade knew that
the Mongol Empire would have to find
find new sources of gold the Mongols
would once more go to
[Music]
war it's during OG's Reign that the
Mongol Empire's Ambitions Grew From the
conquest of its neighbors and
subjugation of other step peoples to a
much more expansive Vision a belief that
the whole world had been destined to
live under Mongol rule and that there
was nowhere on Earth that would Escape
their
conquests to decide where the Mongol
armies should next descend orade
summoned another kural Tha a gathering
of the Clans bringing together the
entire family of chingis Khan their
wives and vassals and key commanders and
here a number of different options were
raised some argued that the Mongols
should March South to the lands of India
others that it was the turn of southern
China and the sun Dynasty who had
watched with such Glee as the northern
Jinn were
destroyed others wanted to March into
the Muslim lands and seize the great
cities of Baghdad Aleppo and
Damascus but there was one final option
that was raised by the general named
named
subai he had been one of chingus Han's
closest generals and was now the last
surviving member of that Old Guard
something that gave him immense respect
he suggested that The Horde ride West
and toward a previously unexplored land
that sat on the periphery of the world a
great Peninsula jutting out of the Asian
land mass about which the Mongols knew
little
these were the lands of
Europe Europe around the year 1200 was
something of a
Backwater it was home to about 70
million people but although it produced
textiles and fine Metals compared to
other areas of the world much of
medieval Europe had low levels of
urbanism other than the huge Byzantine
capital of Constantinople Europe had
only a handful of cities that had even
50,000 inhabitants and even fewer
outside of
Italy its position somewhat removed from
the Silk Road trading routes meant that
it was not a great beneficiary of the
vast wealth that flowed along them and
as a result Europeans were also among
the last to hear news coming out of the
East for this reason Europeans also had
a somewhat confused idea of what the
world beyond their borders looked like
it was widely believed in Europe at the
time that a great Christian king ruled
far in the East a man that they called
prester
John it was supposed that this Christian
Emperor would one day ride West
to help the Christians retake Jerusalem
from the
sarasin when Mongol armies first arrived
in Europe there was at first some
excitement this was perhaps the coming
of the great prestor John but the
reality would be quite
different the late 13th century
Chronicle of novod one of the oldest
Russian histories describes the first
arrival of these nomadic Horsemen about
14 years earlier in the year
1223 the same year for our sins unknown
tribes came no one exactly knows who
they are nor whence they came nor what
their language is nor of what race they
are nor what their faith is but they
call them the
tartars we have heard that they have
captured many many countries slaughtered
a quantity of the Godless peoples and
Scattered
[Music]
others these perplexing foreigners were
in fact a pair of Mongol armies led by
the generals of chingis Khan subai and
jebe they had been sent to destroy any
remains of the kipchak people a large
Confederation of Step Nomads who
occupied the area of the vulgar River
and who fought on the side of the
quarian Empire just a couple of years
earlier these were some of the last
holdouts among the peoples of the step
who had not yet bent the knee to the
Mongols now a large force of kipchak
Turks fled West to Russia and begged the
help of the major power in that region
the settled Kingdom of kavan Russ
centered around the city of Kiev in
modern Ukraine kavan Russ was less of a
kingdom and more a fractus collection of
princely city states that formed a belt
across the European Peninsula from the
arctic white sea in the North to the
shores of the Black Sea in the South and
like the quarians its people had often
employed kipchak Nomads as mercenary
Cavalry in its
armies when the kipchaks fled into
Russia they warned the Russians in no
uncertain terms about what was coming as
the novarad chronicle
records to all the Russians they brought
many gifts horses and camels buffaloes
and girls and they came saying
this all land they have taken away way
today and yours will be taken
tomorrow frightened into action by this
warning the princes of kaven Russ put
together a grand Coalition and mastered
a force of 880,000 men under the command
of grand Prince mlav III of Kiev
together they marched out to meet these
barbarians on the way they encountered
some Mongol envoys who told the grand
Prince that they meant him no harm that
they were only there to destroy the last
remnants of the kipchaks who they
contemptuously referred to as their
slaves and horse
herders but the kavan ruler would make
exactly the same mistake as the Sha of
qum as the chronicle of novarad
recalls the tartars send envoys to the
Russians
saying
behold we hear that you are coming
against us but we have not occupied your
land nor your towns nor your Villages
nor is it against you we have come but
we have come sent by God against our
rebellious horse
herders but the Russians did not listen
to this but killed all all the
envoys still confident of Victory the
Russians Advanced to crush the Mongol
Invaders at the sight of the European
army with its mass of peasant infantry
supported by colorful Columns of heavily
armed Knights their penants flying and
helmets Gleaming the Mongols appeared to
retreat in
panic the Russians were encouraged and
so they gave
Chase they pursued the Mongols for a
whole day and then another and then
another but whenever they thought they
were getting close their Quarry just
managed to pull
away they became perturbed by the almost
Supernatural speed and endurance of
these foreigners how they never seemed
to stop or slow down never seemed to
need supplies never slept or lit
campfires
gradually the Europeans ran out of
steam their horses grew tired and their
foot soldiers too it was at this point
that the Mongol trap swung
shut on the 1 of April
1223 without warning a second Mongol
Army swept out of the forests and began
a massacre on the banks of the Cala
River as the novarad chronicle recalls
there was a terrible and Savage
Slaughter and inav Duke of Kev seeing
this evil set up a stade of posts about
him and fought with them for 3 days and
of the rest of the troops only every
10th returned to his
home a countless number of people
perished and there was lamentation and
weeping and grief throughout town towns
and
Villages as the Infantry was slaughtered
the princes of Kiev tried to flee the
battlefield but they were easily hunted
down by the Mongols a great part of the
Kingdom's aristocracy was wiped out in
that single day of
battle it's recorded that several kavan
nobles were captured and as a punish
pment for killing the Mongol ambassadors
they were stuffed under the floorboards
of one of the Mongol tents all night the
Mongol Warriors feasted and celebrated
their Victory their wait steadily
crushing to death the Nobles beneath the
floor then with their mission complete
the Mongols
vanished they had appeared wiped out an
entire Army with ease and then
disappeared without a
trace the Novgorod Chronicle records the
confusion that the event
swed the tartars turned back from the
river NEPA and we know not where they
came from nor where they hid themselves
again only God knows where he fetched
them against us for our sins
to the medieval European mind the
meaning of this event was clear it was a
punishment from God but little did they
know that worse was on its way
it was the winter of
1237 on the Frozen expanse of the
Russian step when the first Mongol
Horsemen once more appeared on the edge
of
Europe but this time they came to
stay in his chronica Majora or great
Chronicle the English writer Matthew
Paris wrote about these newcomers in
terms of utter condemnation
an immense hord of that detestable race
of Satan the tartar rushed forth like
demons loosed from
hell they are inhuman and of the nature
of beasts rather to be called monsters
than man thirsting after and drinking
blood and tearing and devouring the
Flesh of dogs and human
beings they are invincible in battle
they have of no human
laws know no mercy and are crueler than
lions or
bears the Mongols had waited until the
winter set in for their Invasion so that
the Great Rivers vulga and denipa would
freeze over turning them into a highway
for their horses moving fast Over The
Frozen Ground they once more easily
encircled the Russian armies and utterly
destroyed them
it wasn't just the speed of the invasion
that took the Europeans by
surprise for people in Europe the
technologies that the Mongols brought
with them were so Advanced as to be
indistinguishable from
Magic in the city of ryazan the citizens
were so terrified by the Mongols
incendiary Weaponry the Chinese fire
lances and pots of flaming Napa that
they H from their catapults that in the
confusion they believed that the Mongols
had brought with them trained dragons
from the
east by 1240 virtually all the major
cities of Russia had fallen to the
Mongols in December they rounded on what
was then the cultural religious and
economic heart of the region the great
City on the denipa the city of Kiev
Kiev held out for 9 days during which
the Mongol catapults bombarded it with
stones and flaming
projectiles in Terror its population
flooded towards the great Stone Church
of the tithes that stood on the banks of
the denipa
river they were desperate to get close
to the Shrine of the virgin Mary which
they hoped would protect them and
climbed up onto the church's roof but
the weight of the crowd on the roof
timers caused them to collapse and many
of those Sheltering within the church
were
crushed the Mongol Army soon flooded
into the City and put its people to the
sword of kiev's 50,000 inhabitants it's
reported that only 2,000 or so survived
after the invasion many Russian cities
fell into ruin and stone buildings
stopped for many
decades economic links between cities
and nearby Villages were broken and
famine spread as the novarad chronicle
recounts for what is there to say or
what to speak of the punishment that
came to us from
God how some of the common people killed
the living and ate them others ate horse
flesh dogs and
cats some fed on Moss snails pinear
limebug lime and elm tree leaves and
whatever each could think
of and again other wicked men began to
burn the good people's houses where they
suspected that there was grain
Giovani dapan Del carpine the Pope's
Envoy to the Mongol great Khan traveled
through Kiev a few years later in
February
1246 and wrote The Following description
of the
destruction when we were journeying
through the land we came across
countless skulls and bones of dead men
lying about on the ground he had been a
very large and thickly populated town
but now it has been reduced almost to
nothing for there are at the present
time scarce 200 houses there and the
inhabitants are kept in complete
slavery in some places it took more than
100 years for Russian cities to
rebuild but after devastating Russia
orad's forces were just getting
started one Mongol Army perhaps 50,000
strong headed west through the duchies
of Poland riding in the direction of
Germany and the Holy Roman Empire and
from there all of Western Europe was in
their
path in all the cities of Europe rumors
ran rampant and all anyone had to work
with was a name the
tartars some believed that the name must
mean that the Mongols had actually come
from Hell itself
since it reminded them of the name for
the deepest region of the underworld in
Greek mythology
Tartarus others thought that the name
reminded them of the biblical King of
tarish mentioned in the bible others
still thought that the Mongols may have
been one of the Lost tribes of Israel
now returned to wreak havoc on
Christendom perhaps enraged by the theft
of relics from the holy land during the
Crusades
the English monk Matthew of Paris was
especially responsible for spreading
this idea and tried to work his way
around the inconvenient fact that the
Mongols didn't appear to speak Hebrew or
seem to be Jewish as he wrote in his
great
Chronicle in the time of the government
of Moses their rebellious Hearts were
perverted to an evil way of thinking so
that they followed after strange gods
and unknown
Customs their heart and language was
confused and their life changed to that
of the cruel and irrational wild
beast unable to beat the Mongols on the
battlefield people instead began to lash
out against the defenseless Jewish
communities in countless European cities
and a wave of deadly pograms
began in 1239 a fiery Comet passed by
the Earth seeming to some to be a sign
of God's judgment and in 1241 the Panic
only increased as an eclipse blotted out
the
sun people began to believe that the end
of days might finally have
arrived but the northern Mongol Force
headed towards Germany was in fact just
a distraction a typical Mongol tactic to
attack in multiple places at once and in
fact their true goal was a land that was
much more amenable to their lifestyle
that is the rolling grasslands and River
Plains of Hungary which sat on the edge
of the great step behind the wall of the
Carpathian
Mountains Hungary too had given shelter
to kipchak Turks fleeing from the
Mongols who had begged for shelter from
the Hungarian King Bella I
fourth the Mongols sent King Bella the
following
message I have learned that you keep the
kipchaks my slaves under your protection
I charge you that you do not make me
your enemy on their account for it is
easier for them to escape than for you
since they having no house and
continually on the move with their tents
may possibly Escape but you living in
houses and possessing fortresses and
cities how can you flee from my
grasp for a Time the Hungarian troops
managed to hold off the Mongols on a
narrow bridge on a crossing of the Sho
River but their resistance did not last
long one priest and writer Thomas of
spalato wrote an eyewitness account of
the aftermath of the
battle the dead fell to the right and to
the left like leaves in Winter the slain
bodies of these miserable men were
strewn across the whole rout blood
poured forth like torran of rain the
miserable country stained by the blood
of its sons was died red throughout its
length and breadth
from there the Mongols poured into the
great Hungarian Plaine they wiped out
the Royal Army and sacked towns and
Villages rounding up huge numbers of
skilled people who they took away with
them drafting others to take part in
their human wave assaults of fortresses
just as they had in China and Persia and
killing countless
others the Hungarian King Bella fled
South to the coastal regions of his
kingdom in what is now Croatia and like
the hzm Sha he took a boat out into the
Adriatic and took refuge on an island
there archaeology paints a clear picture
of the desperation of this
time the remains of many medieval
Hungarian churches can be found with
concentric rings of earthwork defenses
hurriedly
constructed and the Earth around them is
littered with arrow heads and the bones
of the unfortunate
Defenders a great number of buried coin
hordes have also been uncovered from
around this time as the Kingdom's
wealthy rushed to hide their riches from
the advancing Mongol
tide when the Mongols finally withdrew
from Hungary in 1242 a year after after
they had arrived they left behind a
devastated
Land one Italian Bishop living in
Hungary named Roger of Tor maior wrote
The Following description of the
Desolation we climbed a tall tree and
surveyed the land destroyed by the
Tartas what pain we began to walk across
the waste and abandoned land that they
had destroyed while retreating to Church
Towers were our way signs and the road
they marked for us was rough the roads
and paths had vanished grass and Thorn
bushes had taken
over the Mongols were now on the borders
of both the Holy Roman Empire and the
Byzantine Empire Europe's two major
Powers it looked as though all of Europe
would now fall all just like northern
China and the kesian Empire before it if
it had it's likely that the entire
history of the world would have gone
down another
path if the Mongols had devastated
Florence Venice and Milan the way they
had devastated Beijing and samak khand
the Renaissance would likely never have
taken place and the modern world as we
know it would have struggled to be
born but history again had other
plans one event would transpire that
would save Europe from this
fate that was the death of the great
Khan
orade ogay had always been a great
drinker but in recent years his
alcoholism had truly got out of control
partly due to tragedy in his personal
life his beloved brother tooi had died a
few years earlier with some even
Whispering that orade had had him
poisoned and his favorite son and Heir
kotu had also died fighting in China a
mission that orade himself had sent him
on from that point with grief and guilt
seemingly Waring inside him orade seems
to have sunk into a
depression he withdrew from government
increasingly losing his appetite for
ruling and all the while he drank and
drank on the 11th of December 1241 the
great Khan OG the son of chingis Khan
died as he had lived in a drunken stuper
after 13 years of rule and at the age of
55 the secret history contains a note
supposedly written by orade himself but
almost certainly penned by one of his
successes in which he notes his
failures I have sat on the great Throne
of my KH father I made the nation live
with their souls on the soil and their
grip on the ground yet although I
carried forward on my back the teeming
Kingdom it was an error of mine to be
vanquished by Grape
Wine this was one of my errors
with Joi and tooi by now all dead and
chagatai dead soon after the last
surviving son of chingis Khan had passed
away but as a man who had lived every
day in the moment and thought little of
the future crucially since the death of
his oldest son orade had named no
successor there was now no certainty at
all over who would rule the empire
after his death all of OG's successors
raised their claims to the throne of the
great khah and even chingis Khan's
surviving brother teuge now in his 70s
suggested that he should
rule suddenly all plans of advancing
further west into Europe were
forgotten this power struggle would last
for 10 years and for five of these the
empire was ruled by a woman the Widow of
OG named ton
Khan she performed all the duties of a
Mongol KH minting coins holding Coral
ties and ensured the succession of her
son
guyuk he ruled for a further 3 years and
during this time declared his intention
to launch a fullscale invasion of Europe
even sending a letter demanding
submission from the
pope but his health would deteriorate
and he died while traveling on the 20th
of April
1248 Europe once again was spared and
during this time of upheaval in the
Mongol Empire the rest of the world
could breathe something of a sigh of
relief
the struggle over who would become Khan
would eventually come to an end with the
rise of a man named
Mona the previous great Khan orade had
seven sons but Mona was not one of them
he he was the oldest son of tooi the one
brother who had never been considered
for the position of
Khan we can tell that this was an
awkward fact for Mona since one of his
first official acts was to Crown his
father tooi as great KH posthumously
thus strengthening his own
legitimacy and when Mona came to the
throne in
1251 he is said to have given a
statement that acted as a rebuke of the
ways of his propagate predecessor
OG I follow the laws of my
ancestors I do not imitate other Count's
ways this question of what kind of
society the Mongol Empire would be is
one that would resurface again and again
over the coming century
like his father before him Mona was an
accomplished Warrior and had fought as
one of the most prominent Generals in
the invasion of
Russia he also had too's somewhat
bloodthirsty and ruthless
streak to quell any resistance when he
came to power Mona purged all members of
the nobility who had supported other
claimants to the throne of the great KH
many of whom were his cousins
more than 300 members of the Mongol
aristocracy were
slaughtered while the Mongols were
hardly shy about spilling blood this
amount of killing in the upper echelons
of Mongol Society was
unprecedented after that he turned his
attention to further
conquests he gave command of his troops
in Persia to one of his brothers named
hulagu and his troops in northern China
to another brother named Kublai ordering
him to prepare for an invasion of
Southern Sun
China meanwhile the Khan Mona remained
back in the Imperial Heartland in his
capital of
karakurum it was during the reign of
Mona Khan that the king of France Louis
VI 9th sent ambassador to Mongolia a
Flemish frier named William of
rhook he would write one of the most
fascinating accounts of life in the
Mongol Court of karakorum at this
time after many months of travel across
the step of Central Asia William of
rubbook arrived at the Mongol Capital
late in the year
1253 he was taken to see the KH and
gives a rare description of of the
appearance of
Mona the Khan was sitting on a couch
dressed in a fur which was spotted and
very glossy like a seal skin he is
snub-nosed a man of medium build and
aged about
45 William was frustrated because his
interpreter was drinking continually
throughout his meeting with the KH and
by the end was thoroughly drunk by this
point he could hardly understand what
the Mongol ruler was saying nevertheless
the Khan gave them permission to stay in
the city and William of rhook began
exploring the Mongol
capital in this Melting Pot in the heart
of the Empire he encountered people from
all over Eurasia including one monk from
China who seems to have had some fun at
his
expense on one occasion a priest from
China was sitting with me dressed in
cloth of the finest red and I asked him
where he came by such a color he told me
how in the east of China there are
soaring Crags inhabited by creatures
built like human beings in every respect
except that their knees do not Bend and
they move along in a kind of hopping and
that they are one cubit tall and covered
in hair they live in inaccessible caves
and when men go hunting them they take
the most intoxicating ale they can brew
and make cup-shaped Hollows in the Rocks
which they fill with the Alee so the
hunters lie hidden and these creatures
emerge from their caves and Sample the
drink crying chin chin and it is from
this cry that their name is derived for
they are known as Chinchin then they
gather around in very great numbers
become drunk and fall asleep on the spot
at this point the hunters come forward
and tie their hands and feet while they
are asleep and next they open up a vein
in their necks and extract from each one
three or four drops of blood before
letting them go free the blood the
priest told me is of the greatest value
for making purple Dy
[Music]
but despite his slightly gullible nature
William explored the city diligently and
there he was astonished to find a number
of other Europeans living and working in
this foreign land thousands of
kilometers from
home we were discovered by a woman from
Mets in France named Pasha who had been
captured in Hungary and she made us as
substantial a meal as she could she told
us about the unheard of destitution she
had suffered but now she was well enough
off she had a young Russian Husband by
whom she had three very fine little boys
she told us that there was also a master
Goldsmith at carac Corum called William
originally from Paris whose surname is
bushe this William bushe had been
working in Hungary when the Mongols
swept in from the step and like many
others before him he had been rounded up
for his skill in metal
working when he arrived in karakorum the
KH Mona had soon recognized his
potential and set him to work building a
remarkable mechanical Contraption out of
silver at the entrance to this great
palace Master William of Paris has
constructed for him a large tree made of
silver with four silver lions at its
root
each one containing a conduit pipe and
spewing forth white May's milk the
branches leaves and fruit of the tree
are of silver there are four conduits
leading into the tree and over each one
of them lies a gilded serpent with its
tail twined around the trunk one of the
pipes discharges wine a second fermented
May's milk a third a kind of Meade and a
fourth a rich ale each beverage has its
own silver vessel at the foot of the
tree ready to receive
it the fountain even had a method of
announcing to guests that the drinking
had begun the perfect centerpiece for a
Mongol
Feast between the four pipes at the top
he made an angel holding a trumpet so
when drink is required a man concealed
it in its cavity then blows strongly on
the pipe that leads to the angel the
angel puts the trumpet to its mouth and
the trumpet gives out a very loud blast
when the stewards in the chamber hear
this each pours his drink into the
appropriate pipe and the pipes spurt It
[Music]
Out by this time Christianity had made
great inroads at the Mongol court and
many of the car wives were Christians
but there were also Muslim Buddhist and
even Jewish holy men living in karakorum
all enjoying the freedom of religion
that made the Mongol realm virtually
unique around the world the KH moner was
curious about religion but seems to have
courted each faith without ever
converting to one of them in order to
perhaps settle the matter once and for
all the great KH organized a ser series
of debates and invited the frier William
of rhook to take
part the following day he sent to me his
secretaries who said our Master is
sending us to you with this message here
you are Christians sarens and Buddhists
and each one of you claims that his
religion is superior and that his
writings or books contain more truth so
he would like you all to assemble
together and hold a conference and each
one to put his claims in writing to
enable the KH to learn the
truth William accepted but he soon found
out that the Mongols arranged their
intellectual debates much like their
wrestling
matches this would be a Rowdy boisterous
Affair and like Mongol wrestlers The
Debaters were expected to drink a large
cup of alcoholic kumis between each
round quickly the holy men became
drunk to their surprise and despite
their bitter differences back home the
Muslims and Christians found themselves
largely in agreement on the broad points
that there was one God that he was all
powerful and that heaven awaited them
after death together they argued against
the Buddhist
who believed in many gods with limited
powers and in reincarnation after death
they argued over the nature of Good and
Evil whether everything in creation is
good and why God allows bad things to
happen according to Williams own account
he effortlessly outsmarted his opponents
but to his disappointment no one agreed
to convert to Christianity then and
there
everybody listened without challenging a
single word but for all that no one said
I believe and wish to become a Christian
when it was over the Christians and
sarens alike sang in loud voices while
the Buddhists remained silent and after
that everyone drank
heavily but if William had hoped to
convince the Great Khan he would be
frustrated
for his part Mona Khan remained
unconvinced we Mongols he said believe
that there is only one God through whom
we have life and through whom we die and
towards him we direct our
hearts but just as God has given the
hand several fingers so he has given
mankind find several paths to you God
has given the
scriptures whereas to us he has given
shamans and we do as they tell us and
live in
peace the debates came to an
inconclusive end and the question over
which was the true religion would go
unsettled for another
day William would leave the khn's court
soon after but during his time in Korum
he had noticed some Extraordinary
Measures of personal security
surrounding Mona and his
household William himself was even
grilled by the Khan's Security
Services they searched our legs chests
and arms to see whether we had knives on
us they made The Interpreter take off
his belt we were summoned by the grand
secretary and judge and they inquired
most minutely whence we came from why we
had come what was our business and this
inquiry was made because it had been
reported to mon Khan that 40 assassins
had entered the city under various
disguises to kill
him monan had good reason to be worried
that's because he had become a target
for a controversial Islamic sect known
as the
hashashin a group who have given us the
English word
assassin the hashashin occupied perhaps
as many as a 100 remote Mountain
fortresses across an area stretching
from the Mediterranean Coast to
Afghanistan but they coordinated their
operations from their headquarters the
lofty alamut castle in the alour
mountain range of Northern Iran alamut
means Eagle's Nest and it was perched
high up on the mountain Crags the
hashashin had no armies to speak of no
infantry and no Cavalry but they
exercised a formidable strategic power
that is they assassinated any Noble
general or King who stood in their way
one writer named Benjamin of tudella
wrote an account of these mysterious
killers and their enigmatic
ruler they call him shik al-h
hashashin he is their Elder and upon his
command all of the men of the mount
Mountain come out or go in they are
believers of the word of their Elder and
everyone everywhere fears them because
they even kill
Kings although it's difficult to unpick
the legends from the truth when it comes
to this secretive sect according to Arab
Persian and Chinese sources the name
hashashin comes from the group's
predilection for the drug hashish a
concentrated resin of the cannabis plant
according to Legends young men would be
initiated into the group by smoking
hashish and under its intoxicating
effects they were shown the beautiful
gardens that the hashashin kept in their
castles Marco Polo recounted one version
of these
Tales upon Awakening from this state of
lethargy their senses were struck with
all the delightful objects that have
been described
and each perceived himself surrounded by
lovely damsels he believed himself
assuredly in paradise and felt an
unwillingness to relinquish its Delights
when four or five days had thus been
passed they were carried out of the
[Music]
garden the young initiates were told
that they had visited The Gardens of
paradise and would be allowed to return
if they were willing to give their life
for the
cause so long as the supply of hashish
was kept flowing the group had an
endless reserve of brainwashed young men
willing to do their bidding as Marco
Polo
describes animated to enthusiasm by
words of this nature all went forward to
die in his service the consequence of
this system was that when any of the
neighboring princes or others gave
insult to this Chief they were put to
death by these his discipled assassins
none of whom felt Terror at the risk of
losing their own lives provided they
could execute their M as
well we don't know if these rumors were
true or just stories made up by the
group's enemies the word hashishi can
often mean simply rabble or Outlaws and
their name may have actually been the
Arabic word assun meaning something like
the principled
ones regardless of the truth what is
certain is that the Assassins were a
thorn in the side of the mighty Middle
Eastern powers like the fmid Abid and
seljuk
Empires over the course of nearly two
centuries they killed hundreds of
notable people including three cffs and
one Crusader king of of
Jerusalem and now they had set their
sights on the KH of the
Mongols they had clearly enjoyed the
respite that the 10 years of Mongol
infighting had brought the world and
hoped that by killing Mona they might
bring about another and perhaps even
that the entire Mongol entity would
simply
unravel in the 1240s one Mongol General
was even assassinated by this group and
for coner this was the final
straw in 1253 he ordered his younger
brother hulagu to March into the west
and crush the Assassins for
good hulagu Advanced into Afghanistan
and from there seized their fortresses
one by
one finally he rounded on the Eagle's
neck castle of alamut high in the snowy
mountains of Northern
Iran atalik juvani describes the site
that the Defenders of alamut Saw
approaching through the jagged
Peaks and from the direction of usandar
they came armies all fire and fury along
steep roads as crooked as the Covenant
of the wicked and from alamut which lay
to the left came the princes balaga and
tutar with a great body of men all
clamoring for vengeance with a host like
a mountain of iron the mountains and
valleys billowed with the great masses
of
men the approach to alamut was Steep and
virtually impregnable but by now the
Mongol armies were experts at Siege
Warfare with their morning draft the
Mongol Army struck the harp of war and
prepared to do battle with mangonels and
Stones they cut down and trimmed for
these manganel the trees which these
people had watered for many years past
not realizing what purpose they would
serve or what fruit they would
ultimately
bear the castle of alamut soon
surrendered and the Assassin assins were
crushed as an independent
force with this inconvenience safely out
of the way the Mongols now rounded on
the Muslim Middle East and its great
capital of
Baghdad Baghdad at this time was a grand
city it was the center of the Abbasid
caliphate throughout the Islamic golden
age of the 9th and 10th centuries
growing to be the largest city worldwide
by the beginning of the 10th century and
though at this point it had suffered
some centuries of decline it was still
the Beating Heart of the Muslim world it
was a city of Cabaret and taverns places
where back gamon and chess were
played on street corners acrobats
performed and storytellers spun tales
for their audiences like those later
found in the Arabian
Knights the city also had formidable
defenses with a high and thick
wall each of its four Gates had double
doors that were made of iron so heavy
that it took several men to open and
close
them the caliphate was ruled by The
califf Who was the supreme religious
figure across the Muslim World somewhere
between an emperor and a
pope until that point relations with the
caleff in Baghdad a man named al-
mustasim had been relatively friendly
but the Mongols had asked him for
soldiers to help them fight the
assassins and perhaps fearing that their
daggers might be turned against him he
ignored the Mongol
request this this respect was enough for
the KH Mona to order his younger brother
hulagu to March down into the lowlands
of Mesopotamia and destroy the caliphate
entirely the Mongols gathered a huge
Force including a thousand Chinese Siege
engineers and swept into the plains of
Mesopotamia in the year 1257
hulagu sent a letter to the kff al-
mustasim urging him to surrender in
ferocious
terms I will bring you crashing down
from the summit of the sky like a lion I
will throw you down to the lowest
depths I will not leave a single person
alive in your country I will turn your
city lands and Empire
into
flames if you have the heart to save
your head and your ancient family listen
carefully to my
advice if you refuse to accept it I will
show you the meaning of the will of
God but the caleff AL mustasim did not
listen
the Mongols arrived at the capital of
Baghdad in January of
1258 the 9th century writer Al jahiz
wrote The Following description of the
site that the Mongol soldiers would have
seen as they approached across the broad
flood plane of the Rushing River
Tigress I have seen such cities in the
district of Syria in Byzantine territory
and in other provinces but I have never
seen a city of Greater height or
possessing more spacious Gates or more
perfect defenses than
Baghdad the Mongols settled in for a
Siege and built a rampart completely
surrounding the city they constructed
their vast manganel and other Siege
engines and began to bombard the city
with their terrifying gunpowder weapons
and incend y pots of Napa brought all
the way from China but once these ran
out the Mongols realized that they had a
problem the Valley of the Tigris and
Euphrates is essentially a vast Salt
Flat and contains virtually no stone so
they had no projectiles for their
catapults faced with this problem they
would have to be
creative the Mongols began to cut down
the the heavy date palms That Grew
everywhere along the riverbank and
loaded pieces of their heavy trunks into
their
catapults the citizens of Baghdad would
soon face the sight of their own date
trees being hurled over enormous
distances into the
city Mongol Siege engines broke through
baghdad's defenses within just a few
days and the assault on the walls began
in late
January by February the 4th Hulu's Elite
forces had seized control of the eastern
wall in a growing state of desperation
the califf al- mustasim made frantic
attempts to
negotiate but hulagu refused even
executing the cff's soldiers who tried
to
surrender the califf ultimately
capitulated on February the 10th and the
Mongols captured him and began to sack
the
city the hait alamia written by an
anonymous eyewitness records the scenes
of
Carnage the inhabitants of Baghdad were
put under the sword on Monday and were
subjected to 40 days of continuous
killing pillaging and
enslavement a great part of the city
including the C I's mosque and its
surrounding were burnt and the city was
laid in ruins the dead lay as Mounds in
the streets and the markets rain fell on
them horses trampled down upon them
their faces were
disfigured and they became an example to
anyone who saw
them some among the city's populations
were
spared the Shia Muslims in the city
as well as baghdad's Jewish population
avoided the worst of the massacre the
city's Christian Community was also
spared since the Mongol General Hulu's
wife was a Christian and asked her
husband to show them Mercy many of the
Glorious libraries of Baghdad were
destroyed and the books within them
likely burned up in the fires that
engulf the
city some later sources like kutub ad
anali writing around 300 years later
embellished the story with the poetic
flourish that the river Tigress had
turned black with the ink of the books
thrown into
it after the slaughter was done hulagu
held a victory Feast where he had the
califf brought to him in Chains the
chronicler Nazir Adin atusi who may have
been present as an eyewitness recorded
the words of the Mongol
General hulagu set a golden tray before
the cff and said
eat it is not edible said the cff then
why did you keep it asked the KH and not
give it to your soldiers and why did you
not make these iron doors into arrowe
heads and come to the bank of the river
so that I might not have been able to
cross it such replied the C
was God's will what will befall you said
the Khan is also God's
will the califf was rolled up in a
carpet and trampled to death by horses
in accordance with the Mongol
requirement that Royal Blood not be
spilled the sack of Baghdad tore the
heart out of the Muslim world and ended
the 500-year rule of the Abbasid Cath
fate but the Mongol armies were just
getting
started hulagu arrived at the Syrian
city of Aleppo in December 1259 and
after a Siege of 7 Days stormed it and
massacred its
population the Sultan of Syria and Nasir
yusf was still at large and when the
news of the sack of Aleppo reached him
he and his army fled
South the Mongols followed hot on his
heels and captured Damascus 16 days
after they had taken
Aleppo the Mongols followed the sultan
down the shores of the Mediterranean and
forged through Palestine up to the
border of Egypt they finally Tracked
Down the Syrian Sultan an Nasir yusf at
the Port Town of Gaza and later had him
killed
now on the border of Egypt hulagu sent
ambassadors to the sultan there a man
named Kus demanding that he swear
loyalty to the Mongol
Empire the Egyptian Sultan responded by
having the men beheaded and displaying
their heads on cairo's bab zuela
gate it was an act virtually guaranteed
to lead to a Mongol invasion and soon
perhaps the land of the pyramids might
have also been added to the vast stretch
of the Mongol
Empire but that was not to be the
case that's because news soon came down
the Silk Road of another seismic shock
that would send Tremors throughout the
Mongol
world that was the death on the 11th of
August
1259 of the great Khan Mona
for years now the KH Mona had been
concerned with how poorly the War in
China was going news of his brother
Hulu's glorious victories in Persia and
Mesopotamia trickled back to him in
Mongolia the destruction of the
assassins the seizing of alamut the sack
of
Baghdad but meanwhile the news from
China was one of slow grinding
progress lukan's other brother Kublai
who had been left in charge of the final
conquest of Sun China could give him
only
excuses the Sun Chinese had by now spent
decades hardening their border on the
yangi river against the Mongol invasion
that they knew would come and their
fortifications were
formidable Kublai was not a seasoned
Warrior like his other brothers he had a
much better head for administration and
Finance in fact he had spent much of his
life feasting in a luxurious estate in
northern China a kind of Quasi Capital
that would be called shangdu and has
been rendered into English as
zanadu eventually the KH Mona announced
that he would leave Mongolia and
traveled to China to take charge of the
war
himself in the step capital of karakorum
he left his youngest brother in charge a
man named aric
Boker Mona took charge of an army and
marched South his final documented
presence was during the siege of Dia Yu
Castle near present day Chongqing in
southwestern
China later Chinese sources claimed that
he was killed during an assault on the
Fortress either by a crossbow bolt or a
flying Stone from a cannon or catapult
but more reliable sources such as Rashid
Adin record that he simply died of a
disease
due to the climate there an epidemic of
dentry broke out Cera spread among the
Mongol soldiers and many of them died
the monarch of the world drank wine to
ward off the Cera and he continued so to
do suddenly he developed an
indisposition and his illness came to a
crisis he soon passed away at the foot
of the Unlucky
Fortress he was 52 years old and this
was the seventh year of his
[Music]
Reign however he died the death of Mona
in 1259 would Mark a watershed in the
history of the
Mongols this was the maximum extent of
their territory and the last time that
the entire Mongol Empire would ever
fight as one force
after the deaths of previous KHS members
of the royal family had mostly rushed
back to Mongolia to help elect a new
Overlord in a grand kural Tha but this
time none of them
moved they decided to stay where they
were and claim their own
territory now the vast sth of Asia that
the Mongols had conquered fractured into
what were essentially four distinct
Empires
firstly in Persia and the Middle East
Mona's brother hulagu declared himself
the ruler or Ilan of the territory he
had spent years conquering which now
stretched from Afghanistan to
Turkey it would become known as the ill
[Music]
carnate second was was in the Northwest
in the step bordering Europe in Ukraine
and Russia and stretching across the
vulgar region to the Ural and Caucasus
Mountains these lands were held by KH
descended from chingis Khan's oldest son
Joi the guest who had fought all his
life to prove himself to his father they
would call themselves The Ulus of Joi
but later historians would give them the
name the golden
horde their rulers would be among the
first of the Mongols to convert to
Islam third was in the center of the
empire in the conquered Silk Road
regions that had once been the kesian
Empire and the vast step of Kazakhstan
and
Siberia here the descendants of chagatai
rued
what became known as the chagatai
carnate presiding over the cities of
samand and bukara which had by now
recovered somewhat from the destruction
of chingis Khan and once more brought
healthy income to their
[Music]
rulers but it was in the East that the
heir to the throne of the great khah
Rose he was the Second Son of tooi and
the late Mona Khan's brother the
somewhat unlikely New Emperor
[Music]
Kublai Kublai was born on September the
23rd
1215 the same year that chingus Han had
sacked
Beijing and for his entire life the
Mongol Empire had been at War in
China as an adult he had been awarded a
Chinese estate with 10,000 households
and since then had divided his time
between China and the Mongolian
step kubli had a liking for the
trappings of settled Society the silks
and the finery
he was advised by Chinese advisers and
even a Buddhist monk who converted him
to Tibetan Buddhism and taught him to
speak Chinese in a rudimentary
way already the people back in Mongolia
may have begun to whisper that Kuai was
more Chinese than
Mongolian when his brother Mona came to
the throne as great Khan Kublai was made
Vice destroy over part of northern China
and set about building an opulent Palace
at
shangu and he was made one of the
commanders of the final assault on the
last Bastion of Chinese culture the
southern Sun
Dynasty but much to the frustration of
his older brother monok Khan the
conquest of the S was a long and
difficult campaign in the song the
Mongols faced without doubt the most
technologically advanced Army on Earth
the song pelted Mongol armies with
repeating crossbows launched huge
gunpowder bombs from their catapults and
even filled their explosives with pieces
of broken pottery to create perhaps the
first shrapnel bombs in
history Rashid Adin paints a picture of
this grinding
campaign the roads were difficult and
the places in Castle's hard to capture
they had repeatedly given battle and
entry and exit had been made difficult
for them moreover on account of the
unhealthy climate many of that Army had
fallen sick and
died still the momentum of Mongol
Advance was by this point Unstoppable
despite heavy losses they pushed
steadily into the heartlands of the
s that was until Kublai heard news that
his brother Mona had died and the Throne
of the great Khan was up for
grabs Kublai had long dreamed of taking
that throne for himself and as Mona's
brother he was a prime
candidate but he was at a distinct
disadvantage having spent so many years
in China he had become distant from the
life of the Imperial
Court meanwhile his main rival was the
man that Mona had left in charge back in
karakorum their youngest brother the
fourth son of tooi aric
Boker while his brothers hulagu and
Kublai were away fighting in distant
corners of the empire aric had been back
in the capital living the life of a true
step Mongol hunting and riding and
supervising the administration of Mona
Khan's Empire and he had been making
friends he was a skilled politician and
over his years in karakorum had come to
gain the support of the majority of
Mongol nobility including most of Mona
kan's own
family it's possible that people may
have hoped that under his rule the
Empire would remain an Empire of the
step for all the people of the felt
walls and would not like Kublai be
seduced by the ways of the settled
societies it had
conquered when the Great Khan Mona died
aric boka knew that his time was short
the chronicler Rashid Adin recalls how
he plotted to seize the throne
no sooner had Eric Boer heard the news
of his brother's death than his eyes
fell upon the Imperial throne and his
courtiers and retainers also urged him
to seize
it but it's worth remembering that
Rashid Adin was writing on behalf of the
Mongol Court in Persia who were ku's
allies and in fact all evidence points
to the fact that Eric Boker was mon
preferred successor and that it was
Kublai and not him who was attempting to
seize the throne in a
coup to Eric boker's Anger he soon got
news that Kublai still in China had held
a cruel tie of his own in 1260 in his
Summer Palace at shangu and announced
his counter claim to the throne of the
great
Khan this action was by all Mongol
standards illegal
it was not held in Mongolia as was
proper none of the royal family was in
attendance and to make matters worse it
was done with some of the trappings of
Chinese ceremony in virtually every way
it was an
affront blindsided Eric Boker rushed to
announce a cruel TI in Mongolia and at
that Gathering he declared himself the
new great KH
in response Kublai gathered his armies
and marched
North the Mongol Empire was now at war
with
itself in the west hulagu ill carnate
backed his brother kublai's claim and
went to war with the golden horde and
the chagatai carnate who backed Eric
Boker and meanwhile Kublai gathered all
his forces and marched into
Mongolia with him he brought all the
might of northern
China unfortunately for Eric Boker his
skill as a politician did not translate
into strategic
thinking although he sat at the
political heart of the Empire his
military position was
vulnerable karakorum had no natural
defenses other than the Mongolian step
of around it and no one who built it
ever imagined it having to withstand a
Siege the city had little agriculture of
its own and for the last 30 years had
needed to be supplied with food and
other necessities along sprawling Supply
routs as Rashid Adin
recounts it was customary for food and
drink to be brought to karakorum from
China by cart Kublai cut off the supply
and this resulted in shortages and
severe
inflation Eric poer was
helpless Eric Booker recognized the
precarity of his position and at his
brother's advance in
1261 he fled the capital for the
northern
step Kublai SW crept into karakorum and
looted the city that his uncle ogod had
built as though it were any other
Conquest he stripped it of much of its
wealth and sent this back to his Palace
at shangu in
China it's likely that the Silver Tree
of karakorum built by the French silver
smith William bushe was also seized and
possibly melted down for
transport treasure carts rolled back
over the GOI desert Laden with precious
things now heading in the opposite
direction only 50 years after chingis
Khan's conquest of the Jin Dynasty
China's wealth was coming
home aric Boker spent the next few years
being chased from place to place trying
to gather caught on the step but his
weakness in the face of his brother's
Advance had destroyed any respect that
anyone held for him at times it seemed
like even the weather had turned against
him as rashed ad dinin
records one day Eric Boker was busy
reing and cusing when suddenly a fierce
wind came and tore out the stakes and
broke the poles of his court tent
resulting in the injury of several
people the court ministers and
commanders took this as an omen of his
demise and totally abandoned him Eric
Boker was left there with only a few
soldiers and he was
dumbfounded the outcome was soon
clear in
1264 4 years into the Civil War Eric
Boker traveled to kublai's Palace at
Shang do to formly surrender in tears to
his brother Kublai is recorded to have
also wept as he received his
surrender Eric Boker was imprisoned and
died a year later while still in
captivity possibly from
Poison Kublai now ascended the throne
and was confirmed as great KH in another
grand cruel Tai but there were some
notable absences at this
event none of the KH of the other sides
of the Empire
attended now the Mongol Empire was
officially divided and turned its
strength not against its enemies but
against
itself the late 13th century Syrian
historian iban wasil recounts the solemn
words of one Mongol
General Mongols are now kill killed by
Mongol
swords if we were United then we would
have conquered all of the
world if chingis Khan had been alive
doubtless he would have reminded his
grandsons of the story his mother o alun
had told him of alun the fair and her
sons and the arrows that United could
not be broken but divided each would
snap one by
one in the coming decades and centuries
this is exactly what would
happen despite ruling over a now much
reduced EMP Empire kubl Khan still
commanded a vast
territory at as much as 14 million
square km it was 50% larger than modern
China encompassing the fertile Central
Plains and a large stretch of the step
of Mongolia and Eastern Russia and he
was determined to build a power base
there that would last and that will
perhaps allow him to reconquer the other
quadrants of his grandfather's domain
but to do that he would have to adopt
the trappings of power that his Chinese
subjects understood according to their
Traditions to this end in
1271 Kubla Khan formerly claimed the
Mandate of Heaven and crowned himself
emperor of
China the following year of
1272 would be the first year of a new
Dynasty which he would call the great
Yuan a word which means either beginning
or
Center in accordance with Chinese
tradition his courtiers begged him to
take the title of Emperor and he
modestly refused twice only accepting
the third time they
asked a Chinese emperor needed an
imperial capital and kubl decided to
move his from the site of shangu and
build a new one near the ruined city of
Beijing that his grandfather had
destroyed there he would build the new
city of Dau meaning great Capital but
his Mongolian and Turkish subjects would
often refer to it as KH balik which in
Mongolian means the city of the
KH Rashid Adin recalls his
decision he designated as his winter
residence the city of K balik which had
been an imperial capital it had been
chosen as a site in ancient times by
astrologers and philosophers and it was
considered to be very auspicious and
lucky since Genghis Khan had destroyed
it Kublai Khan wanted to rebuild it so
for his own Fame and reputation he built
another city next to it inside the city
he built a truly magnificent Palace for
his U its pillars and Paving are all of
marble it was to this capital of KH
balik that a weary traveler arrived from
the other side of the world probably
sometime around the year
1271 he had left his home at the age of
16 or 17 and set out on a journey of
Exploration with his brother that had
taken him across Central Asia and
through many of the lands that now
belonged to the Mongol
carnat his name was Marco
[Music]
Polo it was likely the unification of
much of Asia under the Mongols that
allowed Polo to conduct his journey
since the strict enforcement of the
Mongol yasa law code had kept banditry
and robbery to a
minimum this was the period that has
been called the Pax mongolica or the
Mongol peace when it was said with some
exaggeration that even a maiden carrying
a nugget of gold on her head could
wander safely across the realm without
being
robbed when Polo arrived in KH bik he
was given an audience with the great
Khan which he describes in his later
work I shall tell you of the great and
wonderful magnificence of the great KH
now reigning by name Kublai Khan he is
the most powerful man as regards forces
and lands and treasure that exists in
the world or ever ha existed from the
time of our first father Adam until this
day he is of a good stature neither tall
nor short but of a middle height he has
a becoming amount of Flesh and is very
shapely in all his limbs his complexion
is white and red the eyes black and fine
the nose well
formed he also describes the opulence of
the Khan's
Palace the Hall of the palace is so
large that it could easily dine 6,000
people and it is quite a Marvel to see
how many rooms there are besides the
outside of the roof also is all colored
with Vermilion and yellow and green and
blue and other Hues which are fixed with
a varnish so fine and exquisite that
they shine like Crystal and lend a
resplendant luster to the Palace as seen
for a great way round
Marco Polo was also astonished to see
the Chinese invention of paper money
being circulated by the Imperial mint a
concept that he struggled to
understand he makes them take of the
bark of the mulbury tree and this they
make into something resembling sheets of
paper when these sheets have been
prepared they are cut up into pieces of
different sizes the small smallest of
these is worth a half silver coin the
next a little larger a whole silver coin
one a little larger still is worth half
a silver Gro of Venice all these pieces
of paper are issued with as much
solemnity and Authority as if they were
of pure gold or silver and on every
piece a variety of officials whose Duty
it is have to write their names and put
their seals
anyone forging it would be punished with
death and the KH causes every year to be
made such a vast quantity of this money
which costs him nothing that it must
equal in amount all the treasures in the
world according to Marco Polo Kubla KH
was so impressed with his adventurous
spirit and command of four different
languages that he appointed him an
ambassador
over the next 17 years Polo claims to
have conducted a large number of
ambassadorial Journeys for Kublai
visiting the far south of China Burma
and other lands around southeast Asia
before finally being allowed to return
home through
Mesopotamia back home the Venetian Marco
Polo was taken as a prisoner of war by
the Rival genoise and imprisoned for a
year in
genua during his imprisonment Polo
shared a cell with a writer named
Rustico
daiza throughout their time imprisoned
together Polo recounted his extensive
travels through Asia to rusto who
transcribed them into a work that they
called the description of the world but
it would become known as the travels of
Marco Polo one of the most famous and
influential travel books in
history Polo's work published in a
dialect of Italian caused a sensation
back home and after being translated
into Latin it was published around all
of Europe continuously for the next
centuries but one detail from Marco
Polo's journey does stand
out when he finally got permission to
leave China and return home in
1292 nearly 20 years after leaving home
he returned not over land but by
boat that's because the Pax mongolica
the Mongol peace that had brought
stability to Asia and allowed his
journey in the first place was already
beginning to fracture
despite the glowing impression that the
Empire left on Marco Polo China under
Kua Khan's Yuan dinasty was a troubled
place for one thing it was still at war
with the remnants of the Southern Sun
who held out in several strongholds for
many years but by the 19th of March 1279
the Mongols had cornered the last child
emperor of theung in a coastal Fortress
called yam men at the mouth of the Pearl
River the boy was only six or seven
years of age but he was the final hope
for the continuation of the sun
line when Mongol forces finally closed
in and it became clear that all was lost
one of the young Emperor's attendants
took the boy in his arms and gave the
following
cry the Affairs of the Nation Li in ruin
and our country is destroyed there is no
hope now his majesty has no alternative
but to die for the
country with the boy in his arms he
leapt from The Cliffs into the
ocean it's said that hundreds of the
royal family and attendants followed the
young Emperor to his watery grave rather
than face the Mongols
[Music]
the sorrow of the collapse of the sun
Dynasty would haunt the Chinese people
for
Generations the poet a captured the
sense of melano when he visited the
ruins of the former Imperial Palace at
hangcha and memorialized it in a poem
[Music]
like an ancient ruin the Grass Grows
High gone are the guards and The
Gatekeepers Fallen towers and crumbling
palaces desolate my
soul under the eaves of the long ago
Hall fly in and out the swallows but
within silence
[Music]
the destruction of the sun was something
that many of the Chinese citizens of the
Yuan Dynasty would never forget and for
some it was a wound that they would
never
forgive with the south of China finally
crushed kubl Khan was the first foreign
Invader to ever conquer the whole of the
central plains of
China this was also the first time that
the land had been United since the Tang
Dynasty 400 years
earlier but Kuai had won an Empire now
devastated by Decades of
war the north of China had been
suffering from famine ever since it was
first occupied by the Mongols
its agriculture had always been weaker
than the South where the humid weather
meant that Rice could be grown but in
the north the major crops were wheat
sorum and
Millet since the destruction of chingis
Khan's initial Invasion the northern
economy had recovered somewhat but
famine was an everpresent
threat to remedy this Kuan ordered the
lengthening of the so-called Grand Canal
so that it now connected his new capital
of Khan balik with the old Sun capital
of hcha a symbol of national
reunification that also allowed the
transport of rice from the south to the
famine struck
North this measure improved matters and
for a time a level of stability came to
the once divided land but already the
Mongols were finding that conquering a
vast and complex Kingdom like China was
much easier than actually ruling
it the new hybrid Empire of Mongolian
China was also going through a crisis of
identity ku's government was a tiny
Mongol minority ruling over a vast
population of tens of millions of Han
Chinese and they were steadily losing
their military
Advantage most of his soldiers were now
no longer Mongolian Horsemen but Chinese
foot soldiers the old capital of
karakorum far out in the step had become
an irrelevance its palaces stripped of
their treasures and what wealth it once
had taken back to
China people back in Mongolia must have
begun to wonder who it was that had
actually been
conquered to ensure that the Empire
maintained its Mongol identity Kublai
was Keen to keep all the higher echelons
of power reserved for
Mongols to this end Southern Chinese
people of the former Sun were relegated
to fourth class citizens in their own
country with the northern Chinese above
them the central Asians and tanguts
above them both and of course Mongols as
the Empire's Elite
Class Han Chinese were forbidden from
holding many of the most powerful
positions or holding key roles in the
Civil
Service that meant that many of the
people who were most familiar with the
land and the workings of its
administration were kept away from any
positions where they might do some
good increasingly Kuai feared that he
might lose a grip on this slippery
Empire and so he decided to do what
Mongols had always done when they wanted
to unite people around
them they went to
war first he was determined to conquer
the kingdom of D Viet in the South the
northern kingdom of what is Vietnam
today but these plans would be
frustrated although he swept South in
three major invasions and managed to
capture the Vietnamese capital of
tanglong near modern Hanoi the Mongol
forces found the humid tropical weather
and thick jungle landscape impossible to
contend with the Vietnamese soldiers
melted away into the matted vegetation
and raided Mongol armies with Hit and
Run tactics that slowly whittel away
their strength
as the history of Yuan
describes although the vet were defeated
many times they gathered more and more
troops without sufficient supplies both
our generals and troops suffered
hardships and many of them were killed
in that land the troops and Horses of
the Mongols could not manifest their
talent too eventually they had to
abandon the capital crossing the river
toward the North side to discuss the
plan of
[Music]
retreat while they were never actually
defeated in battle the Mongols
eventually withdrew after taking heavy
losses leaving the kingdom of dvet still
independent if somewhat
devastated these tactics of Guerilla
Warfare were so successful for the
medieval Vietnamese that the generals
who had masterminded them became
national heroes Heroes and the books on
strategy that they wrote would be read
for centuries to
come as a result the same tactics would
be used again in the 20th century when
they would Inspire the North Vietnamese
Army and the irregular forces of the
Viet Kong when they once again faced a
more powerful Invader in the form of the
United
States for his part Kubla Khan was
angered by these failed invasions and
even had one of his own Sons named toan
banished for his part in the
disaster with this embarrassment no
doubt stinging Kublai planned an
invasion of one of the last holdouts
against Mongol rule in the East the
island nation of
Japan the first Mongol attempt to
capture Japan had ended in failure
although they had briefly occupied the
islands of tsushima and
iki although they had inherited a large
Navy from the Jin and sun and the
Koreans who they had recently subjugated
the Mongols were not used to Naval
Warfare and struggled to seize a
credible hold on any land in Japan this
time in the second invasion of 1280
Kublai sent a larger force of perhaps
30,000 soldiers and ordered the
construction of a grand Fleet that was
probably at that time the largest in the
world he was determined to seize a
bridge head from which a larger Force
could spread out over the whole of
Japan the Armada of as many as 4,000
ships sailed from the port of masan in
Korea and from China leaving from Ningbo
at the mouth of the yangi river
they chose the landing site of Hakata
Bay near the modern city of Fukuoka
which sits on the large Japanese island
of kushu just 200 km off the coast of
Korea but Japanese resistance would be
fierce they had learned the lessons of
the first Invasion and spent the
intervening years preparing even
building a strong defensive wall
surrounding Hakata
Bay when the Mongols landed they brought
all the technological might of China
with them the Japanese Source the
hachiman gudo describes the challenge of
dealing with these terrifying weapons
and notes with Scorn the Mongols lack of
adherence to the traditional conventions
of
warfare they sent iron Bombshells flying
against us which made made our side
dizzy and
Confused our soldiers were frightened
out of their wits by the Thundering
explosions Their Eyes Were blinded their
ears deafen so that they could hardly
distinguish East from
West according to our manner of fighting
we must first call out by name someone
from the enemy ranks and then attack in
single
combat but they took no notice at all of
such conventions they rushed forward all
together in a mass grappling with any
individuals they could catch and killing
them many of the invading soldiers were
Chinese not Mongol and they had little
stake in this conflict many deserted or
surrendered when the fighting got tough
the Mongols fought for 2 months at
Hakata Bay in a kind of bitter
stalemate they were unable to make any
Headway against the Japanese defenses
while the Japanese too struggled to
dislodge them
entirely then on the 15th of August fate
intervened a powerful typhoon swept in
from the West a common occurrence in
late summer in Southeast Asia the storm
struck the Mongol Fleet anchored off the
coast causing severe destruction the the
Venetian Marco Polo describes the
outcome now it happened one day that
such a gale was blowing from the north
that the troops declared that if they
did not get away all their ships would
be wrecked so they all embarked and left
the island and put out to sea and let me
tell you that when they had sailed about
4 miles the Gale began to freshen and
there was such a crowd of ships that
many of them were smashed by colliding
with one
another thousands of soldiers were left
clinging to debris or swept ashore by
the force of the storm Japanese warriors
walked up and down the beaches killing
all Mongols they could find only sparing
the Chinese who they believed had been
forced into participating in The
Invasion to the Japanese this typhoon
was no accident
it was the kamikaz or divine wind that
had been sent by the gods to smash the
Mongol Invaders and protect the lands of
Japan to Kubla Khan this further
crushing loss was a disaster from which
his morale would never fully
recover in Burma 2 the Mongols succeeded
in toppling the Empire of B G but the
humid tropical environment in the south
of the country soon defeated them along
with its host of tropical
diseases the Mongols had now found the
geographic bounds of their
expansion there was no more treasure
left to plunder no more lands left to
seize all that was left to do was turn
against one another and collapse from
within
the great KH Kublai died on the 18th of
February
1294 and his death would begin the slow
decline of Mongol power in
Asia in China nine further KHS followed
the reign of Kublai but their Reigns
were largely short unstable and
characterized by widespread incompetence
corruption and famine kublai's successor
his grandson tamur oju died without an
heir and a period of struggle followed
that led to Growing resentment among
China's people meanwhile the Mongols who
remained back in the Mongolian step
increasingly viewed these Emperors as
foreigners who had forgotten their old
way of life
and began to ignore the rule of the
great Khan in
China the last emperor of the Yuan
Dynasty ascended the throne in the year
1333 his name was Togan tamur and it's
in his hands that the Yuan Dynasty would
truly disintegrate
[Music]
toan tamur came to the throne at the age
of 13 and ruled for 33 years but as a
young boy Emperor he mostly left the
business of governing to his corrupt
officials and when he came of age he saw
little reason to change
that during his Reign he presided over a
China Rife with Discord and
instability banditry became rampant with
the weakened Yuan armies unable to
restore
order on top of this increasing Discord
it was during these decades that the
Black Death arrived in Earnest and moved
with shocking speed and lethality
through the population of China and the
rest of the Mongol
world the very trade routes that had
made the Mongols Rich over the last
century now became conduit
through which the disease flowed
unchecked during the 14th century it's
estimated that China would lose between
a half and 2/3 of its population to this
plague one later Chinese Source
describes the effect of this
disease in the Autumn there was a great
epidemic the victim first developed a
hard lump below the armpits or between
the thighs or else coughed thin blood
and died before they had time to take
medicine there were whole families wiped
out with none to bury
them from the late 1290s onward the
countryside endured a truly baffling
intensity of natural disasters including
droughts floods of the Yellow River
plagues of locusts snow storms
torrential rains typhoons landslides
earthquakes and even the reported
appearance of dragons over the Skies of
China these extreme weather events were
partly driven by global weather
conditions and the medieval climate
shift known as the little ice age but
throughout this period of hardship the
Yuan government's ineffective policies
made everything worse and before long
its people became convinced that the
Yuan Mongols had lost the Mandate of
Heaven the later Chinese Source the
history of Ming or mingshi describes the
collapse of central
order at this time the UN government was
no longer in control and bandits rose up
on all sides they amassed armies of
several myriads each
and they all appointed generals and
commanders who slaughtered the officials
and invaded the prefectures and
districts still other Bandits collected
their swarms of soldiers and took
possession of various places on the Sea
Coast the world was in
chaos by
1351 popular hatred of China's Mongol
rulers erupted in a major peasant uprise
ing that would become known by the
Scarlet headgear that its Fighters wore
it was called the red turban
rebellions the red turbans were a large
Coalition of different groups many
motivated by a religious conviction that
the end of the world was coming that the
prophesied final Buddha named mraa would
soon arrive and bring an end to all
suffering
these Rebels met at night in clandestine
meetings and recruited followers from
among the workers conscripted to dig the
Grand Canal it was soon a nationwide
Uprising by 1351 the rebels had seized
several cities and even the old Sun
capital of Kang fell into the hands of
one red turban group in the midst of all
this cas chaos the famine and plague
passed through the village of one young
man living in the Valley of the river
haai right in the center of
China he was barely more than a boy born
into the depths of the poverty stricken
peasantry his name was juu Yuan
Jang the history of Ming describes this
tragedy drought locusts and pestilence
came at that time he was 17 years of age
his father mother and eldest brother all
died in succession the survivors were
too poor to be able to provide a proper
burial for the dead he was now alone
with no one on whom he could
lean this orphaned boy would join a
Buddhist Monastery but from there was
swept up in the rising ground swell of
rebellion and when he was old enough he
joined the red turban
Rebellion eventually he would rise
through the ranks of this Rebel
Insurgency and then break away to form
his own Army to the astonishment of the
Mongols this peasant General even
captured the large and important city of
Nan
Jing after this Victory he announced a
war of National Liberation in the
following term
it used to be said that the Yuan or
Mongols who came from the regions of the
north conquered our Empire not So Much
by their courage and skill as by the aid
of heaven and now it is sufficiently
plain that heaven itself wishes to
deprive them of that
Empire the time has come to drive these
foreign is out of
[Music]
china such was the weakened state of the
Yuan Dynasty that much of ju Yuan jang's
energy was spent fighting not the
Mongols but other Chinese Rivals among
the red
turbans but after years of war he
finally won Supremacy over all other
rebel
groups on the 20th of January
1368 J Yuan Jang formerly claimed the
Mandate of Heaven and declared himself
the Emperor of
China he announced the beginning of a
new Dynasty that he called the Ming
meaning bright or brilliant and this
orphaned peasant would go down in
history with the name of the Hong woo
Emperor with his Rule now secure he
declared his intentions to March North
and against the Mongol capital of Khan
balik as the history of Ming
recounts on the 9th of November the
emperor summoned his generals to discuss
an expedition to the
north he said the unan reign will soon
be over and North China is already in
Ruins now we shall strike northward and
rescue the living from flood and Flame
let us take our veterans of a 100
Battles pit them against their long
untried soldiers and strike directly at
the UN
Capital so great is our force that this
can be done as easily as splitting
bamboo in August of 1368 the Ming forces
arrived in the region of Beijing and at
the sight of the army the Khan's capital
of Khan bik surrendered without a fight
Beijing was now in the hands of the
Chinese little more than 150 years since
chingis Han had sacked
it the later Mongol Chronicle the Altan
toi attributes the following lament to
the last KH of China Togan tamur using
the Chinese name Dau for the
capital my
Dau straight and wonderfully made of
various Jewels the summer residence of
ancient
KHS my dear Dau that I've lost on the
year of the bald Red
Rabbit Nobles born foolish cared not for
their state I was left alone
weeping I became like a calf left behind
on its native
pastures kui the wise Khan spent his
Summers there they besieged and took
precious
Dau I have lost the whole of it to
China next the Hong Wu Emperor turned
his sights on the heartland of the
Mongols the great step itself and the
city that the Chinese called holin the
Mongol capital of
karakorum with vengeance in their hearts
the Ming marched out into the step and
arrived at the walls of karakorum in
1372 after a period of bitter resistance
they occupied the city as the mingshi
recalls on the first first of March the
Duke of way was appointed
commanderin-chief of the Expedition
against the enemy slaves they were to
campaign northward into the sandy desert
he was to depart from the yenan pass and
race onto
holin on the 29th Lee wung defeated the
Juan forces at the oron River on the
18th of May lanu attacked and smashed
the Juan hereditary ruler he captured
his younger son and concubines
princesses princes Jukes and others of
of lower rank totaling several tens of
thousands of people he then returned to
the
capital the timeline of the destruction
of karakorum is uncertain but it was
likely burned and sacked again in
1380 although by this point there would
have been few people left living
there the city had always been a figment
of one great Khan's imagination and when
it lost its status as Capital it had
been in a state of decline for
years now the final death blow was
delivered and though it would resurge a
number of times its ruins would
eventually crumble back into the grasses
of the
step in the centuries that followed its
Stones were taken and reused to create
the Buddhist Monastery of erden zoo
which now sits over its ruin
the destruction was so total that for
centuries the location of the city of
the KHS was lost until in the 19th
century Russian archaeologists uncovered
certain inscriptions in the area of the
monastery that identified the
site today the only sign that the city
ever stood there at all is the Mounds of
Earth covered in the grasses of the step
stretching out to the north of the erao
monastery and among them a single Stone
tortoise one of the four that once stood
at the Four Corners of the city symbols
of everlasting
eternity now it stands alone in the
grasslands of Mongolia an ironic
statement about an Empire that Rose so
far and fell so fast
across the rest of the Mongol world the
dissolution of their rule was sometimes
gradual but just as
total in Persia and the Middle East the
rulers of the IL carnate descended from
the Ilan hulagu Saka of Baghdad would
suffer a similar
fate they would convert to Islam and
adopt many of the ways of life of their
Persian and Arab
subjects during their reign Persia would
experience something of a golden age
creating hybrid styles of architecture
that would be repeated around the world
especially in the India of the
mugal they resurrected the language of
Persian which had until then been
supplanted by Arabic as a language of
administration and literature and
commissioned a gloriously Illustrated
copy of the Epic work known as the Sha
Nama or the book of
kings and they commissioned the
historian Rashid Adin to write his work
the compendium of Chronicles the first
attempted history of the world ever
written and which we have heard much
from in this episode episode but their
time too would
pass the ninth and final ruler of the IL
carnate was named Abu S bahadur
Khan he died in
1335 either a victim of the Black Death
Or poisoned by one of his
wives after that the ilc carnate
disintegrated rapidly into several
states which were soon swallowed up by
the timid and and safavid
Empires the chagatai carnate in the
former lands of the quermian Empire and
Kazakhstan also followed a similar fate
and was snatched up by the warlord named
Timur when his Empire collapsed in turn
the region was given over to local
powers during this time many of the
Cities damaged by the Mongols like
samand and bukar enjoyed a kind of
Revival and became once again wealthy
trading stops along the Silk Road but in
the 15th and 16th centuries as Europeans
opened up trading routes by sea and
bypassed the Silk Road entirely these
cities slowly began to lose their
relevance eventually Merchants stopped
coming the booming markets grew quiet
quiet and many of these cities were
abandoned the destructive power of the
economy eventually left these cities in
ruins more effectively than the Mongols
ever
[Music]
had in the western step of Kazakhstan
Ukraine and Russia the golden horde
founded by the descendants of chingis
Khan's oldest son Joi was the dominant
power for three
centuries but it eventually weakened
under the ravages of the black death and
the competing rivalries of the
descendants of
Joi eventually it split into more than
half a dozen smaller carnat during the
15th
century the lands were divided between
the kazak carnate the carnate of Kazan
the astrian carnate the Crimean carnate
the carnate of siir the great horde the
noi horde and the white horde and the
step once more looked much as it had in
the time before chingis Khan had United
it a Waring mess of competing nomadic
States throughout this time the Mongols
had favored one Russian city above all
others and had allowed it to gather
taxes from the whole region on their
behalf
this city was musavi which we know today
as
Moscow eventually musavi would break out
from under Mongol control and bring the
other city states in the region under
its Banner until in
1547 it founded its own kingdom the zard
of
Russia the Russian Zars would Advance
into the the step now armed with
muskets for the first time in nearly
5,000 years the step horse Archer was no
longer the deadliest entity on the
planet and with the rise of powerful
centralized Nations and the crack of
powder and shot the retreat of the
nomads quietly
began the Industrial Revolution sealed
their
fate soon Railways would carve through
the Wilderness and the sound of
repeating rifles echoed across the
step these technological innovations
finally allowed settled peoples to push
into the most remote and Untamed
territories where once only Nomads had
roamed even the fiercest of nomadic
Warrior peoples were subdued Ed by this
new
age the ancient rhythm of nomadic
incursions which had ebbed and flowed
for Millennia finally came to an end and
the Wild Heart of the step grew
[Music]
still in the 170 years or so between
chingis Khan's first conquests and the
collapse of the Yuan Dynasty the Mongols
had reshaped the structure of the
world old Power centers had been swept
away and in their place new nations
would begin to rise Russia Iran mugal
India and the newly United
China the Mongols have left their mark
everywhere from a vast genetic Legacy to
the names that many of us have
today at this time the tur Mongolian
word for ruler KH is one of the world's
most popular surnames belonging to more
than 23 million people
worldwide and it is the 12th most common
surname in the United
[Music]
Kingdom it's in China that they left
perhaps their greatest
Legacy in some ways the Mongols invented
the modern concept of China uniting its
two halves along with Tibet and
Manchuria making up the borders of the
Modern Nation
today but on the Chinese people the
psychological effect of the Mongol
conquest and occupation was
immense and the centuries that followed
would be characterized by a great
turning in
WS the China of the sun Dynasty had been
inventive and outward-looking seeking
new technologies and foreign
influences but the Ming Dynasty that
took its place was paranoid and
suspicious of
change while the sun had experimented
with Innovative and modern economic
systems the Ming went backwards
reverting to a more feudal society to
deal with with the damage left by the
Mongols this inward-looking mentality is
perhaps nowhere better demonstrated than
in the project that would take up much
of the 15th and 16th centuries that is
the building of the great
wall while China had built defensive
walls for more than a thousand years at
this point it was in the Ming period
that the true great wall as we know it
today took its
shape this snaking line of elegant
fortifications runs for nearly 9,000 km
across the northern border of China
turning the entire land into a
fortress using an estimated 100 million
tons of building material the Ming Great
Wall is the equivalent of building the
Great Pyramid of Giza nearly 50 times
for much of this era the construction of
the Great Wall occupied an enormous part
of the labor economy and political will
of successive Chinese
governments the cost was so great that
the Ming diverted funds from other parts
of their budget especially from their
fleets of
ships the Ming had inherited one of the
largest fleets in the world with
thousands of large vessels many larger
than any ship being built in Europe at
the time these had been used on Voyages
of exploration to India Arabia and
Africa but in the 15th century the Ming
dismantled much of this Naval power and
even burned some of the ships in Harbor
to save
costs the historian James Waton
describes this inward
turn after China's painful experience
with the foreign Invaders
it is no coincidence that the Ming
worked hard to seal off the world beyond
their great wall and to build it ever
stronger in the post Mongol
period the Ming suffered a
self-inflicted wound by their efforts to
seclude their state from the rest of the
world and in doing so effectively missed
out on
modernity but while China looked inwards
and built their Great Wall on the other
side of the continent another people
looked
outwards while China burned its ships
another people were building them these
were the people who were undoubtedly the
biggest winners of the Mongol invasions
and who were now positioned to embark on
a wave of conquests of their own those
were the people of Europe
while Eastern European lands in the
areas of modern Poland Hungary and
Russia had all suffered from Mongol
incursions the kingdoms of Western
Europe in France England Spain and
Portugal had escaped
unscathed and on top of that they had
reaped a huge number of
benefits the anthropologist Jack
Weatherford makes the following
argument although never ruled by the
Mongols in many ways Europe gained the
most from their world system the
Europeans received all the benefits of
trade technology transfer and the global
Awakening without paying the cost of
Mongol
conquest the Europeans who had been cut
off from the mainstream of civilization
since the fall of Rome eagerly Drank in
the new knowledge put on the new new
clothes listened to the new music ate
the new foods and enjoyed a rapidly
escalating standard of living in almost
every
regard Europe was fascinated by the
Mongols and their vast World spanning
Empire in Italy people even started
giving their children Mongol names with
one Grande Khan meaning great Khan being
especially
popular the Mongol had caused Europeans
to come into contact with Chinese
technologies that might have otherwise
taken them centuries more to encounter
among them Chinese paper the compass and
Gunpowder the Elizabethan English writer
Francis Bacon commented on the
transformative effect that these Chinese
Technologies had on European
Society we should notice the force
effect and consequences of invention
which are nowhere more conspicuous than
in those three which were unknown to the
Ancients namely printing gunpowder and
the compass for these three have changed
the appearance and state of the whole
world first in literature then in
Warfare and lastly in navigation and
innumerable changes have been then
derived so that no Empire sect or star
appears to have exercised a greater
power and influence on human Affairs
than these mechanical
discoveries the Mongol conquests helped
Europe in another way too that is in
broadening its
Horizons the text of the travels of
Marco Polo was still being printed in
the 15th century when an Italian
Navigator bought a copy in a genoise
Bookshop
the text had a transformative effect on
him this copy he would read over and
over with an obsessive attention to
detail even leaving handwritten
annotations in its
margins this Navigator dreamed of one
day visiting the lands of the Far East
himself and the court of the great Khan
that he had read about his name was
Christopher Columbus and he too would
change the course of
history in the journal that he kept on
his voyage westwards he wrote to King
Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain
that he wanted to reach this far off
place in this present month in
consequence of the information which I
had given your highnesses respecting the
countries of India and of a prince
called great Khan which in our language
signifies
King of Kings your highnesses determined
to send me Christopher Columbus to the
above mentioned countries of India to
see the said princes people and
territories and to learn their
disposition with the Chinese invention
of gunpowder by this point Europeans had
already developed or adopted cannons
muskets and arabus
and with these in the coming Century
they would conquer vast SES of land in
the Americas and all around the
world the age of European colonialism
and the following 500 years of European
power around the globe all found their
roots in the fertile soil left behind
after The Inferno of the Mongol
conquests
in his work the Canterbury Tales the
first book published in the English
language written around the year
1390 the author Jeffrey chorer relates
one Legend associated with chingis Khan
and writes in the following glowing
terms about his
legacy this Noble King was called genas
Khan who in his time was of so great
Renown that there was nowhere in no
region so excellent a lord at all things
he laed nothing that belonged to a King
as of the sect of which he was born he
kept his law to which he was sworn and
there too he was Hardy wise and Rich and
kept always so well Royal Estate that
there was nowhere such another man this
Noble King this tartar genis Khan
[Music]
in
1876 the Russian traveler Nikolai
mikovich privalsky traveled to Mongolia
hoping to find their traces of the great
KHS of old and perhaps even find the
lost burial place of chingis Han
himself but he found himself
disappointed at what he
saw all he found was the vast empty
grasslands and deserts broken by Rocky
Mounds of stone and the only evidence of
past greatness he could find was in the
people's
[Music]
Stories the effect of these bare yellow
hillocks is most dreary and depressing
when you are among them and can see
nothing but the sky and the
sand no sounds are heard not even the
chirping of the
grasshopper The Silence of the Tomb
surrounds you no wonder that the local
Mongols relate some marvelous stories
about these frightful
deserts they tell you that this was the
scene of the prince ipal exploit of
chingis Khan and here Warriors fought
against the Chinese and slew countless
numbers of people whose bodies God
caused the winds to cover with the sand
from the desert to this day the Mongols
relate with superstitious awe how groans
and cries may be heard in the Sands of
kupi from the spirits of The
Departed and that every now and then the
winds which stir up the sand
exposed to view different Treasures such
as silver dishes which may not be taken
away because death immediately overtakes
the bold man who would venture to touch
them wherever privalsky traveled he
found legends about chingis Khan still
circulating on the lips of Mongol people
some even told him of a prophecy that
the great Khan would one day return and
once again lead his people to
Greatness chingis Khan's memory is
better preserved in OS than in any part
of
Mongolia we heard more Tales here about
the Conqueror than anywhere else the
Mongols reckon that 650 years have
elapsed since his death leaving 150 to
350 years more before his coming
Resurrection the same people assert that
on the very day of the accomplishment of
this miracle some hero will be born in
China with whom jingis Khan will do
battle subdue him and Lead his people
from ordos to what is now called the
land of the Calas the native country of
the
Mongols and if privalsky hoped to find
the grave of chingis Khan he would also
be
disappointed if anyone did know where
his body was to be found privalsky found
that even after so many centuries the
Mongolian people still weren't
telling we could not discover the name
of the temple where Ching gisan is said
to be
buried the Mongols for some reason or
other were would not divulge
it in the 20th century a communist
government seized power in Mongolia and
in close cooperation with the Soviet
Union engaged in purges of some 30,000
Mongolians including thousands of
Buddhist
monks many of the victims were from one
clan who still traced their descent back
to chingis Khan
the Soviets were haunted by the ghost of
the great Khan fearing that he might
become a rallying point for Mongolian
nationalists for this reason they worked
hard to destroy any relics associated
with him closing Buddhist monasteries
and trying to erase all memory of the
great
Khan but the Soviet aligned government
did maintain one aspect of Mongolian
tradition for for 800 years successive
Mongolian rulers had maintained the law
against anyone entering the region of
the Sacred Mountain Buran khaldun the
site where chingis Khan is most likely
buried for centuries this land would be
known as the y kig or great
taboo when the Communists seized power
they feared that this region would
become a pilgrimage site and a focus of
Mongolian nationalism for this reason
the Soviet aligned government maintained
the ancient prohibition on entering it
the region of the great taboo was
renamed and called simply the highly
restricted
area they built a top secret Air Base
there for the use of Soviet planes and
most likely a stockpile of nuclear
weapons so that even in the modern era
the land cannot be entered
without special
permissions and the grave of chingis
Khan remains unfound to this
day I want to end the episode with a
reading from a piece of Chinese poetry
written during this time by a poet from
the Southern Sun
Dynasty his name was Wen Tian
xang when had been a government minister
in Sun China and after witnessing the
destruction of his land he led the
resistance against the Mongol
Invaders he was eventually captured and
held in a Mongol
prison despite all the tortures and
deprivations that he suffered he never
wavered in his resist
istance it was during this time of
imprisonment that he wrote one of his
masterpieces titled crossing the Sea of
solitude as you listen consider the
contradictions and paradoxes of this
time a time of Discovery and exploration
a time of new ideas and unforeseen
encounters but also a time of
incalculable Sorrow as the great powers
of the world Crum LED and a new world
order took
shape imagine the hollowed halls and
shattered walls the empty markets of
samand nishapur and buk imagine the
gutted palaces and empty temples of
Beijing and
hcha imagine the emptied streets and
burned out houses the crumbling
libraries of Baghdad and Aleppo and the
Fallen churches of novarad and Kiev and
finally at the end of it all the
Windswept grasses growing through the
stones of
Korum imagine the world as you know it
coming to an end and a new one rising
from the ashes
[Music]
through painstaking Mastery of the
classics I have risen high but four
years of raging War have well nigh
brought all round destitution and
ruin my shattered country does remind me
of Willow catkins swept by wind in my
life I sink or swim like duckweed beaten
by rain through the frightful shallows
we fought our way they tell us now of
the frightful battle never one but on
the lonely ocean I could but sigh for
being captured and all
alone down Through the Ages who that
ever lived has not met with
death I wish only to leave my loyal
heart shining red in history's great
book foree
[Music]
thank you once again for listening to
the fall of civilizations
podcast I'd like to thank my voice
actors for this episode Michael
Antonis laan Lucas Alexandra Bolton Tom
Marshall Lee Chris Harvey Nick
Denton Henry Stenhouse Amrit Sandu Peter
Walters Matthew bidol Garrett
caver Sebastian
balero and Paul
Castel readings in Arabic were performed
by Osama tahar readings in Chinese by
Richard Tang readings from the secret
history of the Mongols in Mongolian were
performed by whees Ean
Halla the title theme is home at last
by John
Bartman I'd also like to thank my
historical advisers for this episode
Toby Jones of the Oriental Institute of
the Czech Academy of Sciences and Jack
Wilson of the central European
University Vienna you can find Toby on
Twitter at Tobias bahador and if you're
interested in more information about the
Mongols Jack runs a YouTube channel
called Jack Meister Mongol history where
he explores many of the myths and
misconceptions surrounding the
Mongols my book full of civilizations
stories of greatness and decline is now
out in the United States and American
readers can get it from all good
bookstores I love to hear your thoughts
and responses on Blue Sky so please come
and tell me what you thought you can
follow me at Paul mm Cooper and if you'd
like updates about the podcast
announcements about new episodes as well
as images maps and reading suggestions
you can follow the podcast at fall of
civp pod with underscores separating the
words this podcast can only keep going
with the support of our generous
subscribers on patreon you keep me
running you help me cover my costs and
help keep the podcast ad free you also
let me dedicate more time to researching
writing recording and editing to get the
episodes out to you faster and bring as
much life and detail to them as possible
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this
happen if you enjoyed this episode
please consider heading on to
patreon.com slf fallof
civilizations podcast or just Google
fall of civilizations patreon that's p a
t r e o
n for now all the best and thanks for
listening
[Music]
oh for